We'll be introducing the idea that we can analyze signals
as the sum of a bunch of more elementary signals
at different frequencies, where those elementary signals are sine waves.
So let's take a look at the sine wave in more detail,
starting with continuous time.
So here I show you two different sine waves or sinusoids.
One is the cosine wave.
The other one is the sine wave, seen over there.
And what we can see in these signals is that, number one, they're repetitive.
So after a certain period T, T tilde, we are going to have exactly the same
signal.
We're going to use the tilde sign, here, to indicate that we're talking
about continuous time quantities.
If we compare the cosine wave and sine wave,
we can see that they're very similar.
The only difference really being that the cosine wave starts at 1,
whereas the sine wave starts at 0.
But they follow the same repetitive structure.
When we're talking about that repetitive structure,
we can talk about the period or how long
does it take until the signals repeat, or we can talk about the frequency.
The frequency is just the number of times
that the signal repeats within one second.
And we measure that in Hertz.
And of course, there's a relationship between the period and the frequency,
as shown over there.
What we can see is that the frequency is just the inverse of the period.
We can also talk about the frequency in radians per second.
And we obtain that, as shown down below, by taking 2 pi times the frequency.
Even though we have sines and cosines, it turns out
that we only need to deal with one.
We're going to choose the cosine and obtain
the sine by introducing a phase shift phi, as shown on the equation
on top of the graphs, there.
What the phase shift phi does is it introduces a delay.
So if I set phi equal to 0, what I get is the original cosine,
as shown in the middle here, where I've plotted only one period.
Now, introducing nonzero values of phi will introduce
a delay, as shown over here.
And that delay is related to the phase shift phi
by this equation, as shown right here.
And I can derive this equation simply by doing some algebraic manipulation
on the equation shown on the top.
So I've taken that equation on the top there and replicated it down here.
And what you can see is that all I'm going to do is take this 2 pi f
and factor it out.
So when I factor it out, I have to divide through by 2 pi f.
And the plus phi here, I've just replaced by minus minus,
so there's no change there.
And I'm just going to rename the quantity inside here "d."
So I get cosine 2 pi f times the quantity t minus d.
And so this looks just like cosine 2 pi f t.
The only difference is I've replaced t by t minus d.
And remember that, whenever I replace t by t
minus d, that's equivalent to introducing a delay in the signal
by d seconds.
And so what you can see here is that a negative phase
shift is going to introduce a positive delay, as shown on the top two graphs.
And if I have a positive phase shift, then I'll introduce an advance.
In other words, the peak at 1 will occur before 0.
I can obtain the sinusoidal signal that starts at 0
and eventually reaches 1 at pi over 2 by simply introducing a phase shift
of minus pi over 2, as shown over here.
And you can see that that signal looks exactly like the sine wave.
So what we've seen then, is that we really only need to deal with cosines.
And then we can get sines by introducing a phase shift.
And if we just add one more parameter, then we
get the general form for a sinusoidal signal.
The new parameter we're going to introduce is called "A,"
and it's the amplitude.
And that determines the size of the sine wave.
If we're talking about music, what you can think about
is as A determining the volume or the loudness of that particular note.
And so then the cosinusoidal signals then,
are going to be described by three different parameters.
The amplitude A determining the size. The frequency f
determining how quickly the signal goes up and down.
And remember that the period is related to the frequency
by the inverse relationship.
And then finally the phase phi, which introduces that
delay that we just talked about.
And so this is the general form of the cosinusoidal signal
that we'll be using, moving forward.