We will be introducing the idea of analyzing signals
in the frequency domain, which is the idea that any signal can
be decomposed into a sum of simpler signals at different frequencies.
In order to motivate this idea, I'd like to talk
about music, something that we're all familiar with.
And the idea that music is a combination of sounds at different frequencies.
What I show you here is a piano keyboard.
And we have this idea that, if we play different keys
on this keyboard, what we'll hear are notes with different frequencies.
So for example, if I play this key here, what I'll hear
is something like this.
[C]
And as I go up the keyboard, what I'll hear
is notes with higher and higher frequencies.
So if I play these three, in succession, what I'll hear is something like this.
[C]
[E]
[G]
And what you can hear there, is that the notes
have higher and higher frequency.
And of course, music is much more complex than that.
For example, we could play these three together,
and we'd hear something like this.
[C MAJOR CHORD]
Now the sounds that you just heard don't sound exactly like a piano.
They're much simpler.
They're what we call "sine waves."
And I plot the sine waves in these graphs over here,
amplitude as a function of time.
And what we can see is that, as we go up the keyboard
to higher and higher frequencies, the sine waves
start to change faster and faster.
So we have this idea that low frequencies correspond
to slow oscillations and high frequencies
correspond to fast oscillations.
And when we talk about combining these kinds of things
into more complex sounds like chords, what we're really talking about
is adding these three things together.
And if we add those three things together, what we'll see
is a signal that looks something like this.
So you can see it's much more complex than these.
But this is really the sum of a bunch of simpler signals like that.
And it turns out that we can analyze any signal in this way,
as the sum of simple sine waves or cosine waves.
And we can actually visualize music, in this way, using our computers.
For example, if you have Windows, we can use Windows Media Player.
And I show you how to set up your media player
so that you can show some of the diagrams
that we'll see in the next slide.
What I show you here is the Windows Media screen, set up in the way
that I showed you before, so that we can visualize
the frequency content of music.
And so what you see here is a set of bars.
Along the horizontal axis, we have frequency, going from low frequencies
over to high frequencies.
And along this axis here, what we see is the energy in the signal.
So what we're seeing is the energy in the signal at different frequencies.
And as the music plays, what we'll see is
that energy or the frequency content of the music changes.
And so what we'll see is a very strong peak here
at a particular frequency corresponding to the note that's being played.
And we'll start out with very, very simple sounds or music
from very simple sounds and then make it a little bit more complex.
And you can see how the frequency content changes.
So let's play some simple music then.
[F SHARP]
[E]
So this is just a single sine wave.
And what you can see is really just a single peak.
And as the music changes, what you can see is that the location of that peak
changes.
[SEQUENTIAL NOTES PLAY]
[CHORD ADDED UNDER PRIMARY NOTE LINE]
Now we've added a chord.
And what you can see is that there are more than one peak now.
You can see, in fact, there's two peaks here corresponding to the idea
that two notes are being played at the same time.
[MORE NOTES PLAYING TUNELESSLY]
[NOTES STOP]
So what we've seen, then, is that music can
be considered the combination of signals at different frequencies.
And what we'll be seeing, moving forward,
is that we can describe any signal in this way.