It turns out that it's easier to understand modulation
using complex exponentials, because the mathematics become easier,
and also it gives us a nice pictorial interpretation of what's
happening when we perform modulation.
So let's recap where we were.
We saw that modulation is the idea of taking a baseband signal at some lower
frequency, maybe around f_s, and multiplying it, or modulating it,
by a cosine with a higher frequency f_0.
That gives us a signal that looks like that yellow one over there,
and we can express that as a sum of 2 cosinusoidal frequency components,
one at f_0 minus f_s, and the other one at f_0 plus f_s.
We also have this idea that what modulation is trying to do
is take a frequency spectrum, and move it up into a different frequency band.
Right?
So take this baseband signal over here, and move it up into the band around f_0.
And in order to connect this idea with this picture
down here, what we're going to do is we're
going to reanalyze this situation over here using complex exponentials.
So I'm going to take my carrier, which is
going to be a signal around some low frequency in the baseband f_s.
I'm going to look at it in the frequency domain using the Fourier series
expansion. It has a single frequency component here
at f_s, corresponding that cosine.
I can also express that cosine as the sum of two complex exponentials,
one at f_s, and the other one at minus f_s.
But when I add those two together, I have to divide by 2,
and so what I'm going to get in the frequency domain for the Fourier
transform is two symmetrically located frequency components
around the origin, one at f_s, the other one at minus f_s,
with a magnitude of 1/2.
I can do the same thing with the carrier that I'm going to multiply,
that's going to be a higher frequency f_0.
Again in the Fourier series expansion, I have a single frequency component,
but when I look at the Fourier transform representation,
I have two frequency components, two complex exponentials symmetrically
located around the origin, but again the magnitude is dropped by 1/2.
When I multiply those two together, doing
the modulation, what I'm going to do is instead of multiplying
the cosine by the cosine, I'm going to multiply
this sum of complex exponentials with this sum of complex exponentials.
Remember that when I multiply two complex exponentials together,
the exponents are just going to add.
So in that case, what I'm going to get is four terms there.
I'm going to get one,
if I multiply the first term in the first one
by the first term in the second one, I'm going to get f_0 plus f_s.
Then first one times the second one in the second term, f_0 minus f_s.
And then I'm going to get the same thing, but centered around minus f_0.
And so if I look in the frequency domain on the right hand side over there,
what you can see is I'm going to get four components,
at f_0 plus fs, f_0 minus f_s, and the same thing centered around minus f_0.
But now because I've multiplied 1/2 by 1/2, all of those amplitudes
drop down to about a quarter.
But I can take those complex exponentials
and recombine them together, in order to get two cosines again,
but now the amplitude is going to go up again to 1/2.
Let's pull everything together with this example here.
What I'd like to do is send two different messages
that I show you here.
They share the same frequency band, somewhere around a low frequency
around 0, with this bandwidth BW.
Now if I tried to transmit these two messages at the same time,
because they're in the same frequency band,
they would interfere with each other.
So in order to avoid that, what I'm going to do
is I'm going to modulate them by two different frequencies
to try to separate them in the frequency domain.
So when I take this first message here, 0.
What I show you here is the amplitude spectrum using the Fourier series
expansion, but I want to do this with complex exponentials.
So when I take the Fourier transform, what I'm going to get
is a similar looking thing, except it becomes
symmetric, but with half the amplitude.
And now I can just send this through the modulator,
and that's going to put that in the frequency range around f_0.
I can do the exact same thing with message 1.
I'm going to take this one and now what's going to happen
is I'm going to make it symmetric.
Now, you can see the bandwidth has doubled.
The magnitude has dropped by a half.
I can send this again through the second modulator here with frequency f_1,
and now what happens is that they are now separated in frequency.
And so what I can do now is I can simultaneously transmit these two
signals at the same time, but because they're separated in frequency,
I don't have to worry about them overlapping.