Modulation is the process by which we can
enable users to share the same channel using frequency division multiplexing.
So remember that in frequency division multiplexing,
what we do is we allocate each user a separate band of frequencies.
The problem, though, is that typically, the band of frequencies
that we allocate them, for example in 3G it was about 2 gigahertz,
are not the same range of frequencies of the signals that we want to transmit.
For example, if I want to speak and transmit voice over my mobile phone,
my voice data is typically on the range of 20 hertz
up to about 5 or 10 kilohertz, very different than the 2 gigahertz
that I was allocated.
And so in order to solve this problem, what we're going to do is we're
going to take the frequencies that we want to transmit in this range
in, let's say, kilohertz, and translate or move them
into the band of frequencies that we're allowed to transmit in.
And so the process by which we can do that is called modulation.
We're going to give a special name to the kind of signals that we want to transmit.
We're going to call those baseband signals.
And so the kinds of signals that we typically want to transmit
might be digital data signals, voice, video signals.
And so on the right-hand side, I show you on the top an example of something
that you might get from transmitting digital data, maybe
a sequence of ones and zeros.
Now, if I take the Fourier transform or the Fourier series
expansion of that to try to analyze what that
looks like in the frequency domain, you see what I get on the bottom there.
Now, it turns out that because of the very fast transitions
between ones and zeros.
That signal actually has infinite frequency content.
It covers all frequencies.
But the spectrum has a very nice property.
If I look at that spectrum down there, it dies away very quickly
as the frequencies increase.
It looks like in this case it can be bounded by that triangular gray region
that I show over there.
So typically, the baseband signal will have a spectrum
that looks something like this.
It may extend beyond this, but that would be relatively small.
And so I'm going to approximate that thing by saying,
well, it has a frequency spectrum that looks
like this that is limited within a certain frequency
range I'm going to call the bandwidth, which I've abbreviated here by BW.
Now, what frequency division multiplexing does
is it takes the baseband signal and moves it up
into a higher frequency range, for example,
that 2 gigahertz range that I'm allowed to transmit in.
And what you can see here schematically
and we're going to study this in more detail,
is that the frequency spectrum gets moved up,
but it changes in shape a little bit.
So it's not just shifted up there, but there are some differences.
For example, you can see here we have this half pyramid over here,
but we get a full pyramid over there.
And the magnitude looks a little bit different.
Here it's high, but there, it looks a little bit lower.
So in order to understand, we're going to have
to do a little bit more analysis.
But anyways, the way that we can share the same channel
is we can allocate different users with different messages,
different frequencies, that they're going to shift into.
So this user here would shift their message into a band around f_0.
This user here would shift their message into a band around f_1.
And if I add those together, transmit them at the same time,
you can see they're not going to overlap in the frequency domain.
So in order to understand this, let's look at the baseband signal
and make some approximations.
So here, I show you the blue signal that might be the digital data
that we're transmitting.
On the right-hand side, I show you the spectrum, which is relatively complex.
But we know that we can approximate this signal fairly well by one frequency
component.
So I'm going to assume that our baseband signals are just
one frequency component.
Even though they're more than one frequency component,
it turns out that we can take that analysis for a single frequency
component and extend it fairly easily.
So making that assumption, let's try to understand the process of modulation.
What is modulation?
Modulation is really taking a baseband signal
and multiplying it by a sinusoidal carrier.
And the effect of this modulation can be understood
using fairly simple rules from trigonometry
that we learned in high school.
So for example, many of us have seen this.
We may not remember them, but we've seen it.
For example, cosine of A plus B can be expressed
as the product of two cosines minus the product of two sines, and similarly,
for cosine of A minus B.
Now, what I can do is I can get something
that tells me about the multiplication of two
cosines, that first term over here, just by adding those two equations together.
So if I add those two equations together, what will happen
is the plus sign and the minus sign will cancel each other,
and I'll get that the product of those two cosines
is equal to the sum of another two cosines over here.
And so when I apply this to a sinusoidal or a cosinusoidal signal,
one in the baseband, I'm going to call with frequency f_s.
This is typically a low frequency.
And another in a carrier frequency, f_0, this is typically the frequency
that I want to translate up to.
So for example, that might be somewhere around 2 gigahertz.
When I multiply these two things together using the equation over here,
you can see that I get a signal here that has two cosinusoidal components.
One of them has frequency f_0 minus f_s.
The other one has frequency f_0 plus f_s.
So I get a difference of frequencies and a sum of frequencies.
Now, remember that that carrier frequency, f_0,
that I want to translate up to is typically very high,
and so what I'm going to get is frequencies close to f_0
but just offset from it by a little bit, by f_s.
Let's give you a simple example of this.
Suppose that I have a signal here at 1 hertz, relatively low,
and I want to modulate it by multiplying it by a cosinusoidal signal here
at 10 hertz, much higher.
And so when I do that multiplication, I'm
going to get a frequency component at 10 plus 1 and 10 minus 1.
And when I do that product, you can see what I get down on the bottom there.
You can see the 10 hertz sine wave.
That's the high frequency fast modulations
you can see in the yellow signal.
And then the low frequency signal that we're modulating,
this 1 hertz sine wave, is the one that's shown in red.
So when I multiply that quickly varying waveform with that slowly varying
cosinusoidal signal in red, you can see that I get the shape that you
can see in that example right there.