Now that we understand about the frequency domain
and the frequency analysis signals, we can
start talking about how we can share a particular communication channel.
In particular, we'll be talking about wireless communications systems
where signals travel over the air using radio waves.
And so that leads us to the idea of the radio spectrum.
So radio waves are basically electromagnetic waves,
and they can have different frequencies.
So I show you different sinusoidal frequencies,
there are low frequencies and high frequencies.
And the radio spectrum really spans all frequencies from 0 hertz
all the way up to infinity.
Now, these radio waves travel over the air,
and it turns out that air is a common medium.
Everyone shares the same air.
For example, if I'm talking, we can't have
two people talking at the same time in the same room,
because there's going to be some interference.
So what we need to have is some way of sharing a channel.
And that process of sharing a channel is called multiplexing.
For example, when I'm teaching, typically, the way
that we share a channel-- which might be a classroom--
is we divide the classroom into different lecture periods,
and then I teach at a certain period of time, during my class time.
And then after that, another professor might come in and teach then.
And so that process of sharing that classroom channel
is known as time division multiplexing.
And of course, it would be very confusing to students
if two professors came in and tried to teach a class of exactly the same time.
But there are other ways of sharing a channel.
In particular, what we're going to be talking about
is talking about frequency division multiplexing.
What we're going to be able to do is we're
going to actually allocate to every user a different band of frequencies
in which they can communicate.
So they'll be able to communicate at the same time,
but they won't interfere with each other because they'll be
using different bands of frequencies.
So when I divide the radio spectrum up into different frequency bands
that different users can use, you can imagine that the radio spectrum
could become very, very crowded.
So what I show you here is the division of the radio spectrum from 3 kilohertz
to 300 gigahertz, where each row here corresponds
to a different band of frequencies, for example, the first one from 3 kilohertz
to 300 kilohertz. That shows you the way in which the spectrum is divided.
And so the details are not that important.
You can see different colors corresponding to different uses
and things like that, but what you can see
is that everything is all crowded it's all divided up.
It doesn't look like there's much space.
And so how do we determine how to divide that radio spectrum up?
Well, it turns out that that's the job of the government.
The government in some sense owns all the radio spectrum,
and it regulates it.
Every country has their own regulating agency.
For example, in Hong Kong it's called the Office
of the Communications Authority.
Of course, different governments also have
to communicate with each other about how they're dividing the radio spectrum up.
And so our office in Hong Kong deals with an international organization,
the International Telecommunications Union,
which is headquartered in Geneva under the United Nations.
And that's a way that different governments
can coordinate their efforts in regulating the spectrum.
When it comes down to actually dividing the spectrum up, what you need to do
is first get a license from your government
in order to use a particular region of the spectrum.
And since there's a lot of demand for that spectrum,
usually, what the government will do is it will sell parts of the spectrum
through an auction.
And this auction is meant to be more fair, because you have free market
mechanisms at play.
And these auctions can be quite lucrative.
You can see here several results of different auctions
auctioning off different parts of the spectrum here,
and the numbers you're getting are in the billions of Hong Kong dollars.
And so Hong Kong has divided this spectrum up
among different mobile phone operators.
So for example, we have operators like Three, SmarTone, CSL, PCCW,
and you can see that each one of these mobile phone operators
has their own certain bands of frequencies.
And so for example, if we're talking about 3G communication, for example,
here, here, you can see over there and there.
You can see that all of these telecommunication service providers
offer 3G services.
They all offer them in around the same frequency band, around 2 gigahertz
or something like that, but slightly different.
So because they're all operating around the same frequency band,
it means that you can easily switch between operators
with the same hardware, but it makes sure
that the different operators don't interfere with each other.