Hello, everyone.
Welcome to the lab demo for Lab 4.
In Lab 2, we introduced the time frequency analysis for signals.
And here is the example for the frequency analysis of my voice.
Now, I have one question for you to think about.
Can my voice be heard 2 kilometers away or even outside this classroom?
Unfortunately, the answer is no, because that propagation ability of my voice
is not as strong.
It cannot go through the walls or the ceiling of this classroom.
Then, why can I talk with my friend in New York
through a communication system?
This basically tells us that a communication system
has a much stronger ability to transmit signals.
And the answer here lies in the term modulation.
The idea of modulation is similar to the situation that I cannot reach New York
by myself, but instead I need to take an airplane.
During this process, the airplane is the carrier, which
carries me from Hong Kong to New York.
Modulation happens in a similar way.
So basically, we will have a carrier signal to carry the message
from one location to the other.
Imagine, I have a voice signal to be transmitted.
Unfortunately, by itself, the voice signal cannot reach the destination.
So what we can do is we can perform modulation
by multiplying the message signal with a carrier
signal, which has a higher frequency.
After that, we can obtain what we call the modulated signal.
If we look closely, we can observe that the amplitude of the carrier signal
now will would change in the same way as the message signal.
This is also why we call it amplitude modulation.
During this process, we can regard the message signal as the passenger,
the carrier signal as the airplane, and the modulated
signal as the loaded airplane.
So when the modulated signal reaches the receiver side,
we can perform demodulation by multiplying the modulated signal
with the same carrier signal again.
After going through the low pass filter, we
can recover the original message signal.
This is similar to the process when the airplane reaches New York,
I can get off the plane and recover myself.
Then how come the modulated signal has a stronger ability
to reach a further distance?
The reason lies in the frequency domain.
Now, let's look at the process of modulation
and the demodulation in the frequency domain.
Imagine, I have a voice signal, which has a spectrum around the DC region.
By itself, it cannot reach the destination.
However, after performing modulation the spectrum of the message
signal we will be moved to two positions, the carrier frequency
negative fc and positive fc.
Then, why the modulated signal has a stronger ability
to reach a further distance?
We can tell from the spectrum here.
So basically, the modulated signal now has a spectrum
as a higher frequency different from the original message, which
has its spectrum around the DC region.
And the receiver side, the modulated signal
will be multiplied with the same carrier signal again.
If that happens, the spectrum of the modulated signal
will moved to two positions, negative fc and fc.
Interestingly, the original message will occur again at its original position.
If we ask the signal to go through a low pass filter,
we can recover the original message.
In this program, we'll see how modulation and demodulation
happen in both time and frequency domains.
So we first define the sampling frequency to be 1k hertz.
During a modulation process, we need to multiply the message signal
with the carrier signal.
Here, we define the message signal to be a cosine function with frequency 1
hertz and amplitude 1.
Create a breakpoint here. We can observe the time domain representation
of the message signal, which is a cosine function.
After performing the fast Fourier transform,
we can observe the frequency domain representation of the message signal.
Obviously, the message signal has 2 spikes at frequency 1 hertz.
Modulation is performed by multiplying the message signal
with the carrier signal.
Here, we define a carrier signal to be the cosine function with frequency 10 hertz
and amplitude 1.
By multiplying the message signal x with the carrier signal y,
we can obtain the modulated signal m.
We can see the time domain representation of the modulated signal
here.
So obviously, the amplitude of the carrier signal
now will change according to the message signal.
That's also why we call it amplitude modulation.
If we perform the fast Fourier transform on the modulated signal,
we can observe its frequency domain representation.
So now, the spectrum of the original message
is moved to two positions, negative 10 hertz and positive 10 hertz.
At the receiver side, demodulation is performed
by multiplying the modulated signal with the same carrier signal,
And c is the demodulated signal.
We can observe its time domain representation here.
And if we performe the FFT operation, we
can see its frequency domain representation.
Interestingly, the original message now occurs again at its original position.
If we ask the signal to go through a low pass filter,
we can recover the original message.