It turns out that we can get a more intuitive pictorial analysis of mixing,
if we use complex exponentials, rather than cosines.
So remember, we've broken the demodulation process into two steps.
The first one being mixing by that cosinusoidal carrier,
and the second one being low pass filtering.
Now, we're looking at the mixing step, and now
instead of using the cosinusoidal carrier,
I know that I can express the cosine as a sum of two
complex exponentials scaled by 1/2.
And so if we go back and we look at the problem of modulation again,
we'll see that that's very similar to the mixing processes we see here.
So let's take a look at that.
So remember in modulation, we had a cosinusoidal signal
that we are going to send in the baseband at frequency f_s.
We express that cosine as a sum of two complex exponentials.
We multiply it by the carrier, also the sum of two complex exponentials,
and when we do that product, we get the product of those two terms
in the brackets there.
And I'm going to look at those two terms, or that multiplication separately.
First I'm going to do, is I'm going to look at that whole first term
there, which corresponds to the signal that I'm going to send,
and we're going to multiply it by the first term in the complex exponential,
or the first complex exponential term in the second block, which corresponds
to the frequency component at f_0.
So when I multiply those two things together,
remember that when I multiply two exponentials together, all I have to do
is I have to add the exponents, right?
So I take f_0 and I either add f_s or subtract f_s.
I multiply the amplitude so I get 1/2 times 1/2, so I get a quarter.
So pictorially what happens, is when I multiply these two frequency
components times the component at f_0, I'm
going to get a shifting and a scaling by 1/2.
Now, I can do exactly the same thing if I look
at the second term in the second (set of) exponentials.
So I'm going to take the signal here.
Multiplied it by the second term in that second component,
and then I'm going to get exactly the same thing.
I'm going to get a scaling by 1/2, so I get 1/4, as well as a frequency off_set.
Now, instead of being by plus f_0, it's going to be by minus f_0.
So I get that there.
And so in summary, what I'm going to get is
when I do the modulation of this signal by the carrier using
the complex exponentials, I get a shifting
of this signal up by f_0 and down by f_0, or down to minus f_0.
So it turns out that if I have more complex signals, that
have more frequency components than this,
each of those frequency components individually
is treated in exactly the same way.
So pictorially, if I have, let's say, a more complex spectrum for m of t,
let's say, M of f shown over there as a triangular spectrum.
When I multiply it by the carrier, which consists of two complex exponentials,
I'm just going to get two copies.
It's going to be scaled by a half, but it's
going to get two copies, one centered at f_0, and the other one at minus f_0.
So given that pictorial analysis of modulation,
we can understand the demodulation process, or at least
the mixing step in the demodulation process in a very similar way.
The only thing that's different is I'm going to have the x of t
being the thing that's being mixed, rather than m of t.
So if I take x of t and modulate it by the carrier c,
you can see that what's going to happen is
I'm going to get two copies of X of f, one located at plus f_0.
And again there's that scaling by 1/2.
And the other one that's shifted over to minus f_0.
And you can see what I get is I get an overlap there at 0.
And so when I get that overlap at 0, I'm going
to add those two frequency components together, or two sets of frequency
components, and I'm going to get now the original signal at the center part,
except I also have the extra components at plus 2f_0 and minus 2f_0.
So in summary then, when I do the modulation process,
I take the original signal, I multiply it by the carrier,
so here's my original spectrum.
I multiply it by the carrier and I get those two copies
scaled by 1/2 at plus f_0 and minus f_0.
When I do the demodulation process, I simply take that original signal,
now I've scaled it up graphically by a factor of 2,
but the magnitude is still 0.5 there.
And then I multiply it by exactly the same carrier
signal, or an exact replica of that carrier signal.
And then, what I'm going to get at the bottom is going
to be the original signal, you see m of f, replicated down there in d of f,
except scaled by 1/2.
Plus I have the two extra terms that I need
to eventually get rid of if I want to get the original sent signal.