Let's analyze the mixing process, assuming that our signals are cosines.
So if you remember, we're breaking demodulation up into two steps.
The first one being mixing, which we're talking
about now, which is just multiplication of the received
signal by a cosinusoidal signal, and then low pass filtering.
So to understand mixing, we've already seen this through modulation,
and so, let's recap what we know about modulation.
So remember, when we're modulating a signal from baseband
up into a higher frequency, what we do is, we take our signal which
is that baseband, let's say, signal f_s, and we multiply it by our carrier
at another frequency, f_0.
And so in the Fourier domain, what we know
is we have a single frequency component here at f_s,
we modulate it by a signal that has a single-frequency component here f_0.
And we were able to use a trigonometric identity
to show that, when we do that product, we get two frequency components,
one at the difference frequency, f_0 minus f_s, and the other one at the sum
frequency, f_0 plus f_s, as I show you on the right-hand side over there.
Now, a very similar process occurs when we're
doing mixing of the received signal in order
to get a signal back down at baseband.
So here, I show you the modulator, and then the first part of the demodulator
on the other side there, which is the mixing step.
And so to understand the mixing step, let's just take
a look at what happens to the signals.
So the output of the mixer, I'm going to denote by dt,
and that's just the product of the received signal, x of t,
times that cosinusoidal carrier.
Now, I know from the modulation step that the received signal, x of t,
is simply m of t times cosine 2 pi f_0 t.
So I'm going to take this equation here, put it on the top,
and we're going to take a look at this.
All I'm going to do at this stage here is just
take the parentheses here, the square brackets, and move them
so that they surround the cosines.
So I really haven't changed anything here.
I'm going to move this one up to the top now,
and we're going to take a look at this one.
If you look at this one more carefully, what
you can see is, just like in the modulation case,
we have the product of two cosines.
So we can use that same trigonometric identity
to break that into two cosines, one at the difference frequency,
f_0 minus f_0 in this case, and the other one at the sum frequency, f_0 plus f_0.
Now, I'm going to take this one up to the top
here and take a closer look at this.
If I look at this one a little bit more carefully, I see f_0 minus f_0 is 0,
right?
So I'm getting cosine of 0, which I know is 1,
and so all I'm going to get there is exactly 1/2,
and then f_0 plus f_0 is just 2 f_0.
So these cosinusoidal components here are just one
at 0 frequency, and the other one at 2 times that carrier frequency, f 0.
So take this line and move this one up here.
And what I'm going to do now is just multiply through by m of t.
And so I'll get 1/2 of m of t, plus 1/2 of m of t times that cosine term,
move it up again.
And now what you can see is that I have a scaled version
of the original message here.
So remember, our original message was m(t), right,
which went through the modulator, and then
now is being mixed back down to the baseband frequency.
So I have a scaled version, scaled by 1/2 here,
plus I have this extra term here, which depends on the original message,
but is introduced by that mixing process.
So to get a more concrete idea of how this works,
let's take a look at a particular example,
where I'm going to assume that the signal that we want to send, m of t,
is a cosinusoidal signal at a frequency in the baseband, f_s.
So there's a single frequency component that we want send.
We modulate that by the carrier at f_0.
So we get those two frequency components around f_0.
And then when we do the mixing process in the demodulator, what we get
is from our previous result, this expression here,
where I've replaced m of t by that cosine term at f_s,
and I get 1/2 that cosine term there.
And then when I multiply mt times the cosine of 2 f_0, since m of t
is a cosine signal, I get the difference frequency, 2 f_0 minus f_s,
and the sum frequency, 2 f_0 plus f_s.
And I show you the spectrum on the right-hand side over there.
And so now, what we can see is that we originally sent a frequency component,
f_s.
We see that message in the output of the mixer right there,
but, unfortunately, we also have these extra terms that we see over here
that we need to remove.