Demodulation refers to the process of taking
a signal which is modulated from baseband
up into a higher frequency range for transmission, and then taking that one
back down into the baseband so that we can recover the original signal.
So as a review, let's talk a little bit about modulation.
Remember, we might have two different messages that we want to transmit.
If we transmit these together, because their frequency content
overlaps, they would interfere.
So we want to do is, we want to switch those into a higher frequency
range, where they don't overlap.
So we might modulate this one at a certain frequency,
f_0, which would put it into that frequency range,
and then modulate this one down here by another frequency, f_1, which is higher,
which would allow it not to interfere when
both are transmitted at the same time.
Now, once we transmit that over the air, we receive a signal,
then the question is, how do we take this signal that we receive
and recover the original signal, either message 1 or message 0.
In this case here, I show you recovering message 0.
And so, just intuitively, just by looking
at this picture, what we can see is that one thing we need to do
is take this thing and shift it back down into the original baseband.
And also, we have this extra signal over here that we need to get rid of.
So there's really two steps we need to do in demodulation process.
Now, it turns out that one of those processes
is actually very similar to the process of modulation.
So if you recall, for modulation, what we did is we took our original signal
and we want to move it up into a higher frequency band.
And we did that by multiplying by that cosinusoidal carrier.
Now since, in demodulation, we want to shift back down,
that's another shift operation.
It turns out that we can do that in exactly the same way.
We just take the received signal, which I denote by X here,
and then shift it back down by multiplying by another cosine.
In fact, we multiply by a cosine with exactly the same frequency
as we used in the modulation.
That will do the shift, and then we have to remove the signals,
and we do that through a process which is called low pass filtering.
So in conclusion, then, when we're looking
at demodulation, what we're going to do is,
we're going to split this into two steps.
The first step is multiplying by a cosinusoidal carrier.
We're going to call that step mixing, because we're
mixing two signals together by multiplying them.
And then, the second step, we're going to do low pass filtering,
which is going to remove some unwanted signals,
not only that exist already in the signal,
but that are actually introduced by the mixing process.