Filtering is used to remove those unwanted frequency components that were
introduced during the mixing process.
So if you recall, we've taken the demodulation process
and broken up into two steps.
The first one being mixing, and at the output of the mixer d of t,
we're going to get those unwanted frequency
components that we're going to remove using the low pass filtering stage.
So let's take a look at mixing in a slightly more complicated scenario,
where we're actually transmitting two signals at the same time.
So we're transmitting our desired signal, that triangular signal,
at frequency f_0 or modulated up to frequency f_0.
And then at the same time, somebody else perhaps
is transmitting a signal at f_1, that square signal.
And so the received signal, x of t, is going to have this spectrum.
It consists of those two signals,
both modulated up to higher frequencies, but non-overlapping.
And so, in order to recover the signal, with the first step we're going to do,
of course, is the mixing process, where we
multiply by the cosinusoidal carrier, which
remember has two complex exponentials.
And so if I modulate by the green exponential, what
I'm going to get is this spectrum here, shifted over to be centered around f_0.
When I modulate by the complex exponential at minus f_0,
I'm going to get the same thing, just shifted down to minus f_0.
And then you can see that I got an overlap at the origin,
or around baseband.
And so those two frequency components are
going to combine together, so I'm going to get my original signal,
that triangular signal, at baseband, right?
Scaled in magnitude by 0.5.
But I'm also going to have all of this extra stuff, which
is introduced by the original signal itself
during the mixing process, also due to the fact that I'm mixing signals
that are outside of the original signal, or
the ones that were introduced by other users, in particular the one at f_1.
And so I want to get rid of all those, if I
want to get my original signal there in the baseband.
And so in order to do that, what I do is I'll take this signal up here,
and I will do filtering.
So here's my signal that I get at the output of the mixer, right?
So that's D of f, or in the frequency domain, D of f.
And remember what I can do is I can apply a low pass filter to that.
And what the low pass filter does, is it takes the amplitude response, which
I've denoted here by H of f, and multiplies
that amplitude response times all the frequency components over here.
Now, since in this case here the amplitude response
is it 1, inside the bandwidth that I'm interested in here,
inside this region here of 2 bandwidth.
Then what I get is I get the original signal down
at the output of the low pass filter, I'm going to call that y,
and everything else is going to be multiplied by 0,
and that's going to wipe out all those undesired frequency components.
So I'm going to use a low pass filter to eliminate all those frequency
components that I don't want to see.
And so in order for this to work, what I need to do
is I need to choose the filter bandwidth, or this region where
the filter has magnitude 1.
I want to choose that so it matches the bandwidth of the original signal
that I'm trying to transmit.
So just a few words then about the filter bandwidth, right?
So the filter bandwidth then is the length
the positive frequencies over which the amplitude response, H of f,
remains relatively constant, right?
And so for an ideal low pass filter like the one
I show you over there, what it does is it
passes all frequencies between a cutoff frequency minus f_c0 and plus f_c0.
Since I'm only interested in the positive frequencies,
it goes from 0 to f_c0, the cutoff frequency
or the bandwidth of this filter is f_c0.
It blocks all frequencies above f_c0, and also in the complex exponential domain,
it also blocks all complex exponentials below minus f_c0.
Now of course, what I can have is I can have filters that are not ideal, right?
In fact, I will necessarily have a filter that is not ideal,
and so it won't have this very sudden cutoff, where
it's 1 over a certain region, then drops immediately to 0.
So a more realistic kind of amplitude response,
or magnitude of the amplitude response, is
going to be some like when I show you on the right hand side there.
It has a more gradual cutoff than what I showed you.
And so then the question is, well now this is not
constant over an entire frequency band, it's not constant at 1,
but it's always dropping off from let's say a peak magnitude of one at zero,
but then it starts to drop down symmetrically on both sides.
And so the question is, in this case here how do I define the bandwidth?
Well in this case here, what we do is we use
a common measure of the band, which we call the 3dB cutoff frequency.
And this is the cutoff frequency, or the frequency
at which the squared amplitude of the response drops to about half,
or exactly to half its value at f equals 0.
So if I compare the squared magnitude here,
versus the squared magnitude at 0, where does that drop to 1/2?
If I simply solve this equation, I move the H(0) over to the other side,
and take the square root.
I know that the magnitude at the 3dB cutoff frequency
is going to be 1 over square root of 2 times the magnitude at the origin.
And so, 1 over square root 2 is about 0.707.
The reason I call this the 3dB cutoff frequency,
is because that power ratio from the origin to the 3dB cutoff frequency
power I get by taking the square, remember,
is going to be expressed in db, using the expression down there,
10 times log to the base 10 of 1/2.
And if I do that calculation, I'll get minus 3 or minus 3dB.
So that's why I call this the minus 3dB cutoff frequency.
So given all that we've discussed, we actually
have all the building blocks, or most of the key building blocks
that are used in the receivers used in your mobile phone.
So in your mobile phone, most modern mobile phones
use something like this, which is called the direct conversion receiver,
also sometimes called the homodyne receiver.
And the key building blocks that we've seen in this set of lectures
in this topic is the mixing stage here, where
we take a signal that was received by the antenna,
and we multiply it by a signal, a cosinusoidal signal,
which we generate by something which we call the voltage controlled oscillator.
That voltage controlled oscillator allows
us to adjust the frequency of the cosine that we're multiplying by,
so that we can select perhaps slightly different frequencies that we want
to mix down to the baseband, right?
And then the channel select filter is essentially implementing the low pass
filter that gets rid of all those unwanted frequency components,
either that already exists in the signal already
or that are introduced during that mixing process over there.
And there are some other blocks that are also used inside this thing
to get a whole complete picture of what the direct conversion receiver looks like.
So the original signal from the antenna goes through a radio frequency band
pass filter.
This is really to kind of select out the kind of key frequencies of interest.
For example, if we're interested in CDMA,
we would only be interested in frequencies around the two gigahertz range.
Now typically what happens, is that when we receive that signal at our antenna,
it's quite weak, right?
You might be very, very far from the base
station that's transmitting the signal, and so we need to boost up that signal.
Now when we boost up that signal, we want
to make sure that we introduce as little noise as possible,
and so that's really the role of the low noise amplifier.
It tries to boost up a weak signal, so that the subsequent stages, which
also introduce the noise of their own, don't add too much noise
that overwhelm the signal.
So this boosts up the signal, and then we
go into our mixing in low pass filtering stage that we talked about before.
And once we got the low pass output for the low pass filter,
we essentially have the message that was originally
transmitted at the modulator, that we want to then
use, for example, to convert into a voice signal in a mobile phone,
or whatever.
And so all of these steps here have been taking place in the analog domain,
and what we're going to do at the output of the channel select filter then,
is going to convert back into the digital domain.
We're going to sample, quantize to bits.
And then do further processing using a digital signal processor,
for example, the kind of signal processing
that we talked about in Part 1
of this course. And so that really shows you then
that through this analysis, we've really understood
mainly the key important points that are embedded inside the kind of receivers
that you have inside your mobile phone.