Let's take a look at some non-ideal effects
that might occur in practical receivers that we actually use in our daily life.
So remember our original analysis, our ideal analysis,
we assume that we had a signal m of t that we
wanted to transmit at some carrier frequency, f_0.
So we modulate that, by multiplying by a cosine at that frequency.
That gives us two frequency components in the complex exponential domain,
one at f_0 and the other one at minus f_0.
We then transmit that over the air, and other people
could be transmitting the same time.
But we receive a signal here, and then we recover the original signal
through demodulation process.
Remember that was a two-step process, where we first mix it back down
to baseband, which is obtained by multiplying by a carrier frequency
cosine 2pi f_0 t.
That gives us d of t.
But that introduces some additional frequency components
at 2 f_0 and minus 2 f_0, which we remove with the low pass
filter shown in orange there.
So I show you the amplitude response of the low pass filter there,
that essentially wipes out those two frequency
components around 2 f_0 and minus 2 f_0,
leaving only Y(f), which is the signal that is very similar to the modulated signal.
It's just scaled by a magnitude of 1/2, assuming that the transmitted signal is
received with unit gain.
So what's the key assumption in this analysis?
Well, the key assumption is that the cosinusoidal signal
that we used in the modulation was exactly the same
as the cosinusoidal signal used in the demodulation during that mixing step.
In particular, we assume that they had exactly the same frequency,
and they had exactly the same phase.
It turns out that we also assume that they had exactly the same amplitude,
but even if there's a mismatch in the amplitude, that's not
going to affect the result that much.
It's really just going to modulate the amplitude of the signal up and down,
but not really mess up any of the other things, the frequency mixing
that we've talked about before.
So then the key question that we want to answer now
is, what if it is not true that the frequency is exactly the same,
and/or the phase is not exactly the same?
So we're going to take a look at these two questions individually.
So let's first take a look at the question, what
happens if the modulating frequency here, that's used for sending,
is not this same as the one that's used for demodulating.
So here on the top, I show you the spectrum of the transmitted signal
that comes out of the modulator.
So I've assumed we have an original signal or an original message,
that has a spectrum, that as a triangular shape,
and I've modulated up by f_0 for transmission.
Now when I transmit that signal, I'm going to receive it,
and the receiver is going to be different than the transmitter, right?
So for example, the transmitter might be the base station,
but the receiver might be your mobile phone.
And so those are two different oscillators that I'm using,
and so those might not be exactly matched.
So here I assume that, during the demodulation process
I'm mixing with the frequency f_1, which is slightly different than f_0.
Here I've assumed that f_1 is slightly bigger than f_0,
so you can see that on the positive side,
it's slightly shifted over to the right there.
So what happens when I demodulate with this signal that I show over here?
Well, I'm going to get again a copy of this spectrum here,
but now shifted over to f_1.
So if I plot that one here, you can see that I'm
going to get the sum and difference components here,
f_0 plus f_1, and f_1 minus f_0.
And now because f_1 and f_0 are not the same, this is no longer sitting exactly
around 0, right?
You can see it's slightly off_set.
When I multiply the complex exponential at minus f_1,
I get a similar shift, but in the opposite direction,
as shown in yellow over here.
And so now, you can see I get a slight shift down here in baseband
to the left hand direction over here.
And so these things don't exactly line up together.
Of course they're still going to add, right?
But when I add those two things together,
you can see that what I'm going to get is not this original triangular
spectrum that I had, but something that's
slightly distorted or corrupted, right?
So the baseband signal is now corrupted,
because of the fact that this frequency here, that was used in the modulator,
is not the same one that's used in the demodulator.
OK, so you could see that summation there,
as orange is no longer triangular.
So, that means that any small deviation between the modulator
and the demodulator is going to introduce some kind of corruption
degradation of the signal.
So we need to really make sure that those two things are matched,
and so a lot of the work, especially in the circuit design,
is really to make sure that those two things are matched.
What about a shift in phase?
So here I show you the modulated signal spectrum again, right?
And now what I'm going to do is, I'm going to assume that when we go and we
demodulate the signal, as shown on the bottom diagram on the right hand side,
we're going to not demodulate with a cosine signal,
we're going modulate with a sine signal, with exactly the same frequency f_0,
but a sine wave.
And so, remember that a cosine and a sine
are shifted in phase by 90 degrees.
They have pretty much the same shape, it's
just shifted in phase by 90 degrees.
If I look at this in the complex exponential domain,
we saw before that the sine can be expressed
as the difference between two frequency components, one at e
to the j 2pi f_0 times t, right?
Which is this one over here.
And this one over here.
So when I take the difference, I have a positive frequency component
and a negative frequency component.
I also have to divide by j, because what's going to happen
is I'm going to get a complex number when I take that difference,
and I have to make that thing real by dividing by j.
In any event, I can do the same kind of pictorial analysis that I did before.
When I multiply by the green frequency component, what I'm going to get
is a shift over of that triangular pair of spectra over to be centered around f_0.
And now because f_0 is matched in the modulator and the demodulator,
I get the peak here exactly centered at 0,
so there's no frequency mismatch here.
But now when I've multiplied by the negative frequency component over here,
what I'm going to get is a shift over to minus f_0, but also a change in sign,
right?
So I'm going to get this thing flipping over like this.
And when I add these two things together,
you can see that they're going to exactly cancel.
So what that means then is the baseband signal will actually disappear.
So the effect of a phase shift is quite catastrophic. If I don't exactly
match the phase, if I have a 90 degree phase shift, then instead of getting,
let's say, the original signal multiplied by 1/2,
I actually get nothing.
And so, this means that it's very important
that we have what's called coherent modulation and demodulation.
So we've just seen that when the transmitter and receiver
local oscillators are 90 degrees off_set in phase,
the demodulated signal destructively adds at baseband,
and suddenly we receive no signal.
And remember, a phase shift is really just a time off_set, right?
So the phase actually of the signal, the phase difference
between the transmitter and receiver, actually can be changing quite rapidly.
So we need to synchronize the local phase
oscillators creating the carrier cosines at the transmitter and the receiver.
So the phases must be the same at the transmitter and the receiver.
So they either have to both be cosines or both be sines.
And so this is known as coherent modulation and demodulation.
But it turns out that even though this can
be quite bad, I could lose the signal.
It turns out that we can actually play around with this
and actually use something which is called IQ or in-phase quadrature
modulation to actually double the transmission capability of our channel.