Hello everyone.
Welcome to the lab demo for lab 5.
In lab 4, we have introduced modulation, where
we used a carrier signal to carry the message
from the transmitter to the receiver.
Imagine we have a carrier signal here, which is a cosine function.
And we also have a message signal, which we
want to transmit from the transmitter to the receiver.
Amplitude modulation can be achieved by multiplying the message
signal with the carrier signal.
If we look at the modulated signal, we can
tell that the amplitude of the modulated signal
will change, according to the message signal.
That's also why we call it amplitude modulation.
So in this case, we have used the amplitude of the carrier
to carry the information.
If we look at the carrier signal here, in fact,
besides amplitude, we also have two other parameters
we can use to carry information.
Namely, the frequency, and also the phase.
For example, if we change the frequency of the carrier signal,
according to the message signal, that is
the higher the amplitude, the higher the frequency, the lower the amplitude,
the lower the frequency, we can obtain frequency modulation.
By following a similar procedure, we can also obtain phase modulation.
Most of you should have noticed that.
In fact, AM and FM are the most popular techniques used for radio broadcasting.
So next question is, can we also use carrier to carry digital information.
That is, can they achieve digital modulation?
Before talking about digital modulation, let's first
review how we transmit binary information
in part one of this course.
Recall that, at that time, we used two voltage levels, A and minus A,
to represent bit 1 and bit 0, respectively.
We can call it the baseband signal, because its spectrum will
occur around the DC component.
Then, how come they use carrier signal to carry binary information?
Look at the carrier signal again.
We already know there are three parameters
we can use to carry information, namely the amplitude, the frequency,
and the phase.
If we choose two different amplitudes, say, A equals ac and A equals 0,
to represent bit 1 and bit 0, respectively,
we can achieve the amplitude modulation, ASK or amplitude shift keying.
If we use two different phases, say θ=θ₀,
and θ=θ₀+π .
To represent bit 1 and the bit 0, respectively,
we can achieve phase shift keying.
By following a similar procedure, if we choose two different frequencies
f=fc and f = fc+ ∆f
we can achieve frequency shift keying.
In this lab, we will focus on the PSK case, that is phase shift keying.
Let's start from the simplest case, BPSK,
which is binary phase shift keying.
For this case, we want to use one modulated waveform to carry
1-bit information.
Because there are two types of information, bit 1 and bit 0
we want to transmit, we will need two phases to represent bit 1
and bit 0, respectively.
For example, we can use phase 0 to represent bit 1.
And the corresponding modulated waveform
will be Acos(2πft). We can use phase pi to represent bit 0, where
the modulated waveform will be -Acos(2πft).
if we treat cos(2πft) as the basis function for one signal dimension,
then the two values here, A and -A
will be the coordinates of the two signal points used
to represent bit 1 and bit 0.
In fact, if we draw the constellation map for BPSK modulation,
we can see that cos(2πft) represents one signal dimension
on this constellation map.
And the two signal points we use to represent bit 1
and bit 0 will be two points on that signal dimension.
The next question is how can we implement BPSK modulation?
Imagine we have the carrier signal here, and we
have a sequence of binary information, 1, 0, 1, 1, we want to transmit.
Then how can we perform BPSK modulation?
Recall from previous lab that the two modulated waveforms
we use to transmit bit 1 and bit 0 are Acos(2πft) and
-Acos(2πft), respectively.
So we can first generate the baseband signal,
where we use A and minus A to represent bit 1 and bit 0, respectively.
Next, the modulation can be achieved by multiplying the carrier
signal with the baseband signal.
And we will obtain the modulated signal, where the phase of the carrier
will be used to represent bit 1 and bit 0, respectively.
Next, we have use one MATLAB program to show
how we can implement BPSK modulation.
So we first define the sampling frequency, the carrier frequency,
and also the parameter samples per bit.
The message we want to transmit from the transmitter to the receiver
is the text message, hello.
Recall from previous slides, in order to implement BPSK modulation,
we should first generate the baseband signal,
and then multiply it with the carrier signal.
Similar to part one of this course, there
are several steps we need to construct the baseband signal.
In the first step, we convert the text message to bit sequence.
And then we form the frame structure.
Finally, we can generate the waveform from the frame structure.
Now, let's look at the baseband signal in time domain.
So here's the result. We can tell that the baseband
signal used two voltage levels, 1 and minus 1, to represent bit 1
and bit 0, respectively.
And also, we can tell the binary sequence here, 1, 0, 0, 1, etc.
Instead of directly multiplying the baseband signal with the carrier signal,
here we ask the baseband signal to go through a low-pass filter,
with cutoff frequency 25 kHz.
We really explain a little bit later why we want to do this.
Now, let's look at the output from the low-pass filter.
By comparing the signal after, and before the low-pass filter,
we can tell that the signal becomes much smoother
after the low-pass filter.
But still, we can also tell the binary sequence here, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, etc.
The next step, we will multiply the output of the low-pass filter
with the carrier signal, cos(2πft), and obtain the modulated signal.
Now, let's see, the modulated signal.
So here is the BPSK signal after the BPSK modulation.
We can tell that now the amplitude of the carrier
will change, according to the message signal.
Then, why do we want to use the low-pass filter in this process?
To answer that question, let's look at the three signals in frequency domain.
For that purpose, we perform the FFT operation
on the baseband signal.
The signal after the low-pass filter, and also the BPSK signal, respectively.
Here's the result.
So in this figure, there are three plots.
The first plot corresponds to the amplitude spectrum of the baseband signal.
And the second one is the spectrum after the low-pass filter.
By comparing those two signals, we can tell
that the low-pass filter limits the bandwidth of the signal
to be less than 5kHz.
It guarantees that, after modulation, when
the spectrum is moved to the position of the carrier frequencies,
the modulated signal will not affect other signal.
That is basically the reason why we want to use the low-pass filter.