In a previous example, we have seen how we
can implement BPSK modulation, where we used one modulated waveform to carry
one bit information.
The next question is, can we do a little bit better
to transmit two bits information by one modulated waveform.
If there are two bits information, we will have four possible combinations,
namely 11, 01, 00, and 10.
In order to carry four possible combinations, we will need four phases.
For instance, we can use the four phases, π/4, 3π/4,
5π/4 and 7π/4, to carry the four possible combinations.
And because there are four signal points,
we call it QPSK, quadrature phase shift keying.
Then, what will the constellation map for QPSK modulation look like?
For that purpose, let's look at the modulated waveform.
where the θ, here will take value from one
of the four possible phases.
With the help of trigonometric identities,
we can express the modulated signal in another form.
After some mathematical manipulation, we can rewrite the modulated waveform
as a sum of two terms.
If we treat cos(2πft) as the basis function for one signal dimension,
then sin(2πft) will represent the basis function
for another signal dimension.
And the two terms here, Acos(θ) and Asin(θ)
will represent the coordinates of the signal points
on the two signal dimensions.
In fact, for QPSK modulation, we call them the I Channel and Q Channel,
respectively.
This tells us that, in the constellation map for QPSK modulation,
there will be two signal dimensions, which are represented by cos(2πft),
and sin(2πft).
Now, let's identify the position of the four signal
points on the constellation map.
For that purpose, we need to determine the coordinates of the four signal
points, and the corresponding bit sequence.
For example, for the case θ=π/4,
the two coordinates will be 11 and the corresponding bit sequence will be 11.
For the case θ=3π/4, the two coordinates will be -1,1,
and the binary sequence represented by this signal point will be 01.
Similarly, when θ=5π/4, the two coordinates will be -1,-1,
and the binary sequence represented by this signal point will be 00.
For the case θ=7π/4, the two coordinates will be 1, -1,
and the corresponding binary sequence is 10.
Now, if we look at the signals on the two channels,
I channel and Q channel, respectively, we
can tell that, in fact, those are two BPSK signals.
Basically, this tells us we can achieve QPSK modulation,
by first performing BPSK modulation on the I and Q channels,
respectively, and then sum them together.
In the following, we will use a MATLAB program to see
how we can achieve QPSK modulation.
First, we define the sampling frequency, the carrier frequency,
and the parameter samples per bit.
The two messages we want to transmit, on the I and Q channels,
are two text messages, hello, world.
We do the same thing on both I and Q channels.
That is, we first convert the text message to bit sequence,
and then we form the frame structure on both channels.
Then, on the I channel, we will generate the waveform from the bit sequence.
And then ask the waveform to go through a low-pass filter,
with cutoff frequency 25 kHz.
Then, we use the output of the low-pass filter
to modulate the carrier signal, cos(2πft).
The operation on the Q channel is similar,
where we first generate the waveform.
Ask the waveform to go through the low-pass filter,
and then use the output of the low-pass filter to modulate the carrier signal.
The only difference here is, the carrier signal
we use is no longer the cos function, but the sin function.
Finally, we sum the two signals on the I and Q channels
together to achieve QPSK modulation.
Now, let's look at the three signals.
The I Channel signal, the Q Channel signal, and also the QPSK
signal in time domain.
Here is the result. So basically, the two signals, on the I and Q Channels,
are two BPSK signals.
And the QPSK signal is basically the summation of the two BPSK signals.
Next, let's look at the three signals in the frequency domain.
For that purpose, we perform FFT operation
on the I Channel signal, Q Channel signal, and the QPSK signal,
respectively.
Here is the result. So basically, we can tell
that both the I Channel and the Q Channel signals
will occupy the same spectrum.
And as a result, when we sum them together, to achieve the QPSK signal,
the QPSK signal will also occupy the same bandwidth.
Now, we have a problem.
Since the I Channel and the Q Channel will occupy the same spectrum.
How can we differentiate them at the receiver side,
and recover the original message?
In the lab exercise, you will design the QPSK receiver
and recover the original messages.