In this program, I will show you how to perform time frequency
analysis on my voice signal.
For that purpose, we will first record my voice by using some audio device
with the help of this MATLAB program.
So here, we first set up some parameters for recording my voice.
T = 2 indicates that we will record my voice for two seconds.
Then we define the sampling frequency, the number
of bits to represent one sample, and also N channels = 1
will indicate that we only record the voice on one channel.
The function "audiorecorder" will create an audio recorder object.
And also, we add a buffer of 0.15 seconds
to remove the transient response.
What follows is a "while loop", where the program
will keep asking me to record my voice until I'm
satisfied with the recorded samples.
There are two functions we need to pay attention to.
The first one is recordblocking, which will capture my voice,
and the function Play will play the recorded audio back.
After we successfully recorded my voice, the voice signal
will be saved to one file called test.wav.
After that, we will perform the Fast Fourier Transform on the time domain
signal to obtain its frequency domain representation.
You have learned the details about Fast Fourier Transform in the lecture,
and also you will do it again in the lab exercise.
So, I will skip the details here.
After that, we will show the voice signal
in both time and frequency domains.
Now, let's run the program.
So the program asks me to hit Enter to start recording.
So I hit Enter.
Hello.
I said something and if I hit Enter again, I can hear it back.
Hello.
Am I satisfied with the voice?
Maybe not.
So I input 0.
The program asks me to record my voice again.
Hello.
Let's hear it back.
Hello.
This time it's better, so I accept it.
And after that, we can show the voice signal
in both the time and frequency domains.
The time domain representation of my voice
shows how my voice will change as time goes by,
while the frequency domain representation of my voice
tells me some interesting phenomena.
At least, we can tell that my voice energy is not
evenly distributed over the spectrum.
This can be very useful when designing a communications system.