From the time and frequency analysis of my voice signal,
we have observed that the energy of my voice
is not uniformly distributed over the spectrum.
In fact there are some major frequency components.
This is very useful because it indicates
that whenever I want to transmit my voice,
I do not need to transmit all the frequency components.
So in this program, I will show you how we can reconstruct the time domain
signal by using only part of the frequency components.
First, we define the number of samples for FFT operation.
We also define a digital frequency to be 4 over N.
Recall that when performing FFT operation,
the sampling frequency is normalized to 1.
So 4 over N here is a frequency less than the sampling frequency.
Then we create a signal x, which is the summation of 3 sinusoid signals, whose
frequencies are f, 2f, 3f, and their amplitudes
are 10, 5, and 1, respectively.
If I create a break point here and ask the program
to run until the line above the break point,
we can observe the time domain representation of the signal.
Obviously, the summation of 3 sinusoid signals is no longer a sinusoid.
If I create another break point and run the program,
we can have the frequency domain representation of the same signal.
Obviously, there are three key frequency components.
We have six peaks because both the positive and negative spectrums
are included here.
If we look closely, we can even identify the frequencies to be 4 over N,
8 over N, and 12 over N, respectively.
This tells us there are three key components in the signal.
If we use all the three components and perform inverse Fourier transform,
we can definitely recover the original time domain signal.
In the following, we will use a "for loop" to compare
the performance of reconstructing the original signal by using
1, 2, or 3 of the most significant frequency components.
And the result is shown here.
So obviously, if we only use the first component, which is a sinusoid,
it is not good to use this signal to approximate the original signal.
However, when we use two of the most significant frequency components,
the approximation is almost acceptable. And if we use all three frequency
components, we can perfectly recover the original signal.