Hello, and welcome to our course, A System View of Communications
from Signals to Packets, Part 2.
In this overview, I'll talk about the course in general, and in particular
how this course, or this part of the course, fits in
and what we'll be covering in this part of the course.
So very generally, this course overall discusses how
do we transmit information wirelessly.
For example, when we're sending a text message
or making a call to our friends via our mobile phones.
And so it turns out that this process, although relatively
simple to handle in our daily life, involves many, many steps.
And so what we've done in this course is divided that problem into three parts.
In Part 1, what we talked about was how do we transmit from a single sender
to a single receiver.
In this case, we consider the link that's
shown in the upper left-hand corner of your screen here,
where we assume we have a single user using a cell phone to communicate
with what's called the base station, which
is the first link in the chain of connecting your call to somebody else.
There we examine the problems of how do we
encode the information that we want to send,
and how do we ensure correct synchronization.
In Part 2, what we talk about is how do we share that channel.
So typically what we have is not just one person talking to the base station,
but the base station serves a wide geographical area in which
there may be many users in that region.
And so the question then is how do multiple people all share
access over the air using radio waves.
And finally, in Part 3, what we talk about is if we want to complete a call,
we might need to make a connection from let's say this person over
here or let's say the person over there on the right-hand side of the screen
all the way to the person over here.
And so because they're talking to different base stations,
the base stations have to hand the message to the correct base station
to complete the call, and so the question is how is that done.
In this part, we'll be talking about the problem of sharing a channel.
How are we going to address this problem?
Well, we're going to have to build up some tools.
And so in order to kick that off, we're going
to start with going back to the communication system
that we talked about in Part 1, which I'll show you schematically here.
And we're going to add something to this.
What we're going to add is something which is called source coding.
Another name for source coding is compression or decompression,
and you may have used this in your daily life,
for example, when you're dealing with MP3 or you're zipping files for storage
on your computer.
And so the key idea of source coding is you want to take some information here
that's stored as bits or some other form and compress it
so that it takes up fewer bits than it did originally.
On the other end, the decompression process takes those fewer bits
and tries to reconstruct the original information over here.
And we call this source coding because an effective method of doing this
relies on a proper understanding of the information source here.
You have to understand what are the properties of that source,
if you're going to be able to do information compression or data
compression properly.
We'll talk about two types of source coding, lossless and lossy.
In lossless encoding, no information is lost during the compression process.
So when I do the decompression, I recover the original file
without any changes.
And so we typically do this for digital data that we've created,
for example, a Word file or something like that,
where I want to make sure that what I see, and what I give to you
are exactly the same.
The key concept that we're going to exploit in this case
here is the idea of entropy.
Entropy is a concept that is capturing
the idea of what is the complexity of that source,
and how hard is that to encode.
And we're going to have to use that in order
to understand what are the limitations of the lossless encoding algorithm
that we'll use, which is called Huffman coding.
When we talk about lossy compression, what we have is
that we do the compression, and when we uncompress the data,
the output that we get is not going to be exactly
the same as the original input data.
We typically use this, for example, for situations
like we're doing audio or video compression.
You might use this on a daily basis in your phone
when you're listening to an MP3 file.
The key concept here is that we need to get a good model of the way
that you perceive sounds so that we can throw away information or lose
information which is not going to be perceptible to you.
And it turns out that in order to model that correctly,
we're going to use concepts which are called the frequency domain
analysis of systems signals, and we're going
to discuss those in topics 3 and 6.
So lossless compression in topic 2, lossy compression in topic 4,
but we're going to have to introduce the idea of the frequency domain
before we go into that.
Once we have this concept of the frequency domain
we'll be able to understand the idea of what we call a filter.
Now, we're going to start this discussion out
by talking about a very mundane example of a filter, this water filter shown
here.
Some of us may have this in our house if the water supply that we're
getting into our house is dirty. Typically
what you want is you want to have the water supply here which might contain
impurity shown in red, and after you go through the filter,
hopefully you have pure water coming out,
or at least most of the impurities, especially the large impurities
have been filtered out.
It turns out that when we look at the channel we looked at in Part 1,
we can also interpret the channel as being a filter.
And so in order to understand the channel as a filter,
we have to understand, well, for the input signal,
can we break it down into different components like we've done here.
For example, for the dirty water, we break it down
into components, like water, small particles, bigger particles,
and the biggest particles.
So if we can break down our input signal into a sum of components,
and that will be the concept that we'll discuss in the frequency domain
analysis of signals, then we can talk about how each of those components
passes through the filter, just like we do here.
For example, you might say a 100% of the water goes through,
but maybe only 1% of the large particles go through.
And we can do a similar kind of thing when
we talk about frequencies in the signal going through that channel
or going through the filter.
And the filter is going to be a key method
that we use to understand the system, and also a technology
that we're going to have to use when we talk about sharing a channel.
So the process of sharing a channel in the wireless communication domain
is known as multiplexing.
And there are many different kinds of multiplexing, some of which
I show here.
And so the key concept behind multiplexing
is that you need to have a way of taking a common channel
and dividing it up so that different people can use it without interference.
So for example, these two, space-division and time-division.
If you're taking classes at the university,
you may have been using these kinds of things already.
For example, if I have an entire university, that's a shared campus,
but I have to hold different classes in that campus at the same time.
What I typically do is I divide the campus up into different classrooms
where each of the classes can take place in different classrooms
without interfering with each other.
In the university setting, I also have to share
that classroom with other professors or other students for different classes,
and typically I do that by time-division multiplexing, or time-division sharing.
I take that classroom, which is maybe available for 24 hours,
and I break it up into smaller chunks, classroom periods of about an hour
or an hour and a half, and then during that one hour and a half,
only one person can use it, but we can share that over the 24 hours
by assigning different people into different class times.
There are other techniques.
For example, modern communications systems often
use code-division multiplexing, but what we'll concentrate on in this course
is frequency-division multiplexing.
And we'll cover this concept in three topics.
In the first topic what we'll do is we'll
talk about the problem of modulation.
And so when we talk about dividing a channel up into different frequencies,
we're going to rely heavily on our concept
that we talked about before, the frequency domain analysis of signals,
and we're going to allocate everybody a different portion of the frequency,
what we call the frequency spectrum.
And what we need to do is make sure that people can take their signals
and put it into that portion of the spectrum,
and that process is called modulation.
Once they've put it into that portion of the spectrum,
they need to transmit it and then get it out of that portion of the spectrum,
and that process is called demodulation.
Now, one of the key concepts that we'll have to deal with
is the idea that we want to make use of the spectrum or the space
that we're allocated as efficiently as possible.
We don't want to have any wasted space.
And so in order to do that transmission effectively
when we're talking about frequency division multiplexing, what we'll do
is finally talk about the idea of IQ modulation,
or in-phase quadrature modulation.
And in particular, we'll talk about how we can use that kind of technique
to transmit digital data, and we'll talk about quadrature phase shift keying,
or QPSK.
And so overall that will be the Part 2 of the course,
and we'll go from these basic tools about understanding
the properties of the source and how can we
characterize the properties of the source
all the way to an understanding of how we
can use that knowledge to share a communication
channel among multiple users.