In this topic we'll be talking about how to send digital information
over wireless channels.
And the first method we'll talk about is called Binary Phase Shift Keying.
Critical to the idea of sending information over channels
is the idea of modulation.
So generally speaking modulation refers to the process
of taking a carrier signal for example, a sine or cosine wave,
and changing or modulating some part of it in response
to information that we want to send.
Up to the current time what we've been talking about
is a situation like this where we have a modulating signal multiplying
the cosinusoidal carrier before transmission.
And so in this case, what we have, is we have
what's called amplitude modulation because what the modulating signal
m of t is doing is changing the amplitude of that cosinusoidal carrier.
Now, when we talk about modulation we also
often talk about analog or digital modulation.
And this is not specific to the idea of amplitude modulation
but what it really refers to is looking at this m of t
signal, the modulating signal, and asking well, what kind of information
are we trying to send?
Are we trying to send analog information,
for example, voice or video or sound, or something like that?
Or are we trying to send some digital information: digital bitstreams, maybe
digitally encoded video, or something like that.
And so, depending on the kind of information
we want to send through m of t, we call it analog or digital modulation.
And this can apply to other kinds of modulation
schemes besides the amplitude modulation that I show you here.
In any event, what we're going to be doing is
we're going to be talking about, in this topic, digital modulation.
How do we send digital data?
And the first way we'll talk about is called Binary Phase Shift Keying.
And so, in one sense we can think about Binary Phase Shift Keying
as being an amplitude modulation scheme where the modulating signal here
is created by looking at the incoming bitstream, let's say 1 0 1 1
0 1, and simply creating a waveform, m of t,
which is constant at A if the bit is 1, and or consonant minus A
if the bit is 0.
And so we're going to hold that waveform constant for a certain time, t,
which is the bit time.
So we studied this before in Part One.
And so all we're going to do is just going
to take this signal here and multiply that by the cosinusoidal carrier,
or, in this case here I use the sinusoidal carrier
and that's fine as long as I use the sinusoidal carrier to demodulate.
And when I do that multiplication, I get the signal that's
shown on the other side over there.
And what you can see in that signal over there is that for each bit time
we're really sending two different waveforms.
Right?
We're taking the sinusoidal carrier and we're either multiplying it
by plus A, in which case it looks very similar, just scaled by A, or minus A,
in which case the waveform is flipped upside down.
So if you look the waveform here in comparison to the waveform over here,
you can see that it's simply flipped upside down.
So that corresponds to multiplying by minus a.
So in some sense we can think about then Binary Phase Shift
Keying as being a form of amplitude modulation.
So why we call this Binary Phase Shift Keying?
Why do we talk about this phase?
Well it turns out that we can also consider
BPSK to be a form of phase modulation.
So remember what we're doing is, if the input bit is 1, we multiply by A.
Right?
So we send a sine 2 pi f_0 t, right.
If the input is 0 we multiply by minus A,
and it turns out that if we multiply by a negative 1, what we're doing
is just shifting the phase by pi, right?
So if I put in sine of 2 pi f_0 t plus pi
that's the same as minus sine of 2 pi f_0 t.
And so now if I look at this waveform here, or this expression here,
and compare it, the amplitude is the same.
So the amplitude hasn't changed in response to the information
that we're trying to send.
What has changed is the phase.
So we call this Phase Modulation.
And for this particular case because we have two different symbols we're
sending, we call this Phase Shift Keying.
And if we visualize that phase as being, for example,
the phase of a number in a complex plane,
then we say that we're changing the phase of the carrier between 0, which
is on the right hand side, and pi, which is on the left hand
side in that diagram over here.
So we're changing between two different phase values
to send two different digital bits.
Once we modulated the signal we can then transmit it and then at the receiver
we need to figure out how to recover our original digital data.
And so in order to take thereceived signal
and then recover the digital data what we're going to do is we're
going to do the demodulation process that we talked about before
and combine that with the ideas of sampling and thresholding
that we talked about in Part One.
So here I show you a diagram of the BPSK receiver.
What we have is a signal that we sent so this
is modulated so you can see that the phase or the amplitude
is changing in two different ways, depending
on whether we send a 1 or a 0.
We take that, we multiply it by a coherent carrier.
Right, so since we modulated by a sine we need to demodulate by a sine.
So here's a sinusoidal carrier that we're
going to multiply these two things by in the mixing step.
Then we have the images that we need to reject by lowpass filtering
and once we do that we recover a waveform that
is very similar to the original waveform that we saw before.
Of course, because of the lowpass filtering there's going to be,
perhaps, some blurring of the transitions and things like that.
But in any event, we have a signal that now
is varying between a high value and a low value
and we're going to then subsample that every T seconds and then compare
the value at the sample to the threshold.
And so you can see there if we mark the sampling points by the red dots there
and compare with the threshold in the middle,
let's say around here, then what we're going to get is 1 0 1 1 0 1.
So now we know the basic ideas about how we can transmit and receive
digital data over a wireless channel using BPSK.
Seems like it was a fairly straightforward combination
of the ideas of modulation and demodulation
and the sampling and thresholding arguments
that we talked about in Part One.
However, when we're dealing with wireless communication channels
there's one more consideration that we need to take an account.
That consideration is the transmission bandwidth
that we're using when we're transmitting the signal.
Remember that wireless communication is going
over the air, which is shared by everybody who wants to transmit.
And so as I discussed before, when you want to transmit something over the air
usually you have to apply to the government
and the government gives you a small area
within the spectrum that you can use and you're not
allowed to go outside that spectrum.
So what's the problem with this kind of naive idea of BPSK
that we talked about just now?
Well if we look at the digital signal that we're trying to transmit here
you can see that we have these very, very sharp transitions.
And so remember whenever we have very, very sharp transitions what
that implies is that the signal has a lot of high frequency content.
So what I show you over here is the spectrum of the signal.
And what you can see is that there is, of course,
a lot of low frequency content corresponding with these flat regions
here.
It drops down over here at 1 over T, where T is the bit period,
and then it comes back up.
And so you can see that there are these sidelobes over here
which are relatively high frequency.
Now the problem is going to happen when we take this signal
and we modulate it up using the sinusoidal carrier.
Remember, when we do that modulation process what we're going to get is
we're going to get two copies of the signal,
one at f_0 and the other one at minus f_0.
And so I show you the spectrum over there
on the right hand side of the screen and what you can see
is that because of the high frequency content over here
that spectrum is spread out over the entire spectral range.
And so usually we're given a very small, narrow range, for example,
the range around this region over here.
And so we're not allowed to go outside that range as we show here.
And so, to some extent, when we send this signal,
we're kind of encroaching into other people's territory.
Territory that has been granted to other people to use.
And so that's going to cause interference to them
and they're not going to be very happy about that.
So how can we address this problem?
Well in order to address this problem what we need to do
is we need to reduce the bandwidth that we're
using before we do the modulation.
And, of course, we've already studied a way to do that.
The way that we can do that is using lowpass filtering.
And so if we apply a lowpass filter here that has the right bandwidth
then we can eliminate or significantly reduce
these higher frequency sidelobes sitting at the higher frequencies
as you can see over here.
So after I apply the lowpass filter the spectrum
might look like that, considerably more narrow.
And so this lowpass filter is sometimes called a pulse
shaping filter or transmit filter.
And then when I take that orange signal that you can see there and then
modulate it up to plus f_0 and minus f_0 by multiplying by that sinusoidal
carrier, what you can see is that the spectrum is going to be much more
contained within a small region around f_0.
So I'm not going to be sneaking over or leaking over into other people's
territory in the wireless spectrum.
The one thing that we have to be careful about when
we're doing this lowpass filter is you can
see that, because we've applied this lowpass filter,
the transitions that were getting over here have been blurred out.
And so we saw before in Part One that that(low pass filtering) leads to something which
is called intersymbol interference.
So when we're applying this lowpass filter
the good thing is we're not going to be taking over other people's
or leaking into other people's radio spectrum.
But we're going to be introducing intersymbol interference
and that's going to be limiting the rate at which we can transmit information.
And so we need to be careful when designing that lowpass filter.