Constellation diagrams are way of visualizing
the performance of a digital modulation system using QPSK or, in fact,
many other kinds of modulation systems.
And what it does is it allows us to examine or visualize
the effect of different phenomena that we might encounter
in practical communication systems.
So what is a constellation diagram?
Well, here I show you the original QPSK system that we talked about.
I have the in-phase and quadrature data that I've
encoded as a modulating waveform.
And I modulate it by the sine and cosine carrier,
send it across, then demodulate and low-pass filter.
And I get the signal, which looks very similar to these two here.
And in order to recover the original digital data, what I need to do,
remember, is subsample that at different points in time,
and eventually I would compare with a threshold.
But when I do the constellation diagram, or I
construct the constellation diagram, what I do
is I only do that sampling operation.
So if I'm going to sample at these points in order to do my comparison,
what I'm going to do is I'm just going to get a value at each sample
point for I and Q. And I'm going to plot each of those values for I
and Q on a 2D plane.
All right?
So for example, if I sample this point here, I might get this point here,
let's say, a plus 1 and plus 1.
That would correspond to this point over here.
So I would make that plot over there.
Then I would go to the next sample point, let's say, minus 1, minus 1.
That would correspond to this one here.
Then I would get plus 1, plus 1.
So I'd get another point over here, which I would just plot
on top of the existing point.
Then when I get plus 1, minus 1, that would give me this point down here.
And I would just do that looking at those samples
where I'm going to do the bit comparisons
and then plotting it, or overlaying, those plots.
And so as more and more samples are collected,
the constellation diagram eventually displays all possible symbol values
that appear at the receiver.
Right?
And what the constellation diagram does, then,
is it gives us a way of visualizing how separated different situations are.
All of those four different dots there correspond
to different combinations of input bits, 1's and 0's,
at the in-phase and quadrature channels.
Right?
Now, in this case here, everything was very simple,
and so we only see four dots, even though there are actually
many, many dots that are just all overlaid on top of each other.
And we call this thing a constellation diagram
in reference to the constellation of stars that you see in the sky.
In this case, you can only see four of them.
But in a more realistic situation, you might
see different kinds of constellations, and that will tell you
how well your communication system is performing
and how difficult it is to recover the original data.
So one practical situation you might encounter is that of noise.
And you can imagine that what noise is going to do
is it's going to take the signal, maybe it's
going to be introduced inside here in the channel after the modulation.
And then after I do the demodulation, instead
of getting that nice smooth signal that we saw on the previous slide,
you might see this kind of variation, right?
Even though it's supposed to be relatively constant inside here,
there's some variation due to the noise that we saw before.
Now, depending on where I sample, right, that red dot that I get
is going to be moved up and down according to the noise.
And so when I plot those dots, they're not
going to overlap all on the same point now,
but there's going to be some spread, right?
So now you can see the constellation here
has spread out from that single point out to a wider region here.
And the size of that region is a function of how much noise
there is in the channel.
The more noise there is, the more spread those points or those stars
are going to be in the constellation.
So if the noise is big enough, you can imagine
what's going to happen is that these points here are actually
going to spread out so far that some of the points
will actually cross over into the other part over here,
and that would cause a bit error.
And so now using the constellation diagram,
you can visualize the effect of noise and perhaps
anticipate whether your channel is going to have a lot of bit errors
or not based on your examination of that.
Now, in fact, we've already seen some other way
of visualizing the channel output, right,
and that was the eye diagram, right?
And so remember what we did with the eye diagram is we said,
well, we send in a random bitstream into the channel,
and maybe we're going to get some output over here.
And we're going to look at pairs of bits,
or waveforms corresponding to pairs of bits, and overlay them.
And so now in this case here, what I'm going to look at
is the effect of the transmission filter, right?
So remember that when we're doing this modulation process,
we take this digital data.
We create this waveform over here.
Because of the very, very sharp transitions here,
this waveform here is going to have a very, very wide frequency spectrum.
And so when we translate that up by modulating
by the carrier over here, what's going to happen
is that that frequency spectrum is going to spread out
into neighboring channels that are not allocated to me
but are allocated to other people to use.
And so that's not allowed.
And so in order to eliminate that or reduce
that spreading of the spectrum, what I normally do
is add this low-pass filter here, also called the pulse-shaping filter
or the transmit filter.
So I call it the transmit filter here.
And so then remember what happens with the transmit filter is
you have to be careful because it can limit the performance of your system
due to intersymbol interference.
And we saw that one way of visualizing the effect of intersymbol interference
was the eye diagram.
So what we can do is look at these outputs
over here, the output of the low-pass filter, and construct the eye diagram.
In fact, because we have two waveforms, one for I and Q,
we'll have two eye diagrams, as we can see over here, one for the I channel
and one for the Q channel.
But because the properties are very similar,
the eye diagrams will look very similar after I construct them here.
And so you remember that what we want to have for a very, very
good communication system is a wide-open eye.
So we can see here the wide I has this nice, wide, open shape over here.
And the eye diagram, then, tells us also a little bit about what
happens when we decode, right?
So remember what happens when we decode, we
choose to sample at different points along the waveform over here.
That corresponds to sampling on the eye diagram at different points.
And what we'd like to do is sample at the points which are at the points
where the eye diagram is as wide open as possible
because that's going to lead to the fewest bit errors as possible.
So I would sample here, and then one more bit period over here.
Now, when I do the constellation diagram,
remember what I do is I don't plot that whole time trajectory.
I only look at the value over here at the sample points here and here.
So I'm only looking at these values over here and these values over here.
So you can see there's a little bit of a spread.
And so when I plot the I and the Q values simultaneously on the I/Q plane
to create the constellation diagram, what you can see
is that you're going to get a little bit of spread in the constellation values
at each of those four different points in the constellation diagram.
So there's some spread there, but it's fairly confined, right?
You can see you're not going to get that many bit errors.
Although there's a spread, it's still maintained within a small area,
as you can see over here.
So if I have a nice, wide, open eye diagram,
right, then in the constellation diagram what I'm going to see
is very, very tight symbol clusterings or symbol
groupings inside the constellation.
Now, I can further reduce the amount of spectrum
that I'm using, right, by decreasing the bandwidth of this low-pass filter,
by cutting out more and more high frequencies.
But what that's going to do, it's going to introduce more and more intersymbol
interference.
And so we can visualize that with both the eye diagram
and the constellation diagram.
So here what I show you is a very similar situation.
The only thing that I've done here is I've changed the low-pass filter
here so that it has a slower response, right,
so that it's not passing as many high frequencies.
And you can see the waveform here looks much smoother than it
did on the previous screen that we saw.
And so now I can plot both the eye diagram and the constellation diagram.
And what you can see here is that the eye now has closed, right?
Now, before we had that nice, big, open eye, but now you can see
the eye is relatively closed.
Again, we can construct the constellation diagram
by looking at the sample points over here and looking at these points
here and plotting them versus the I and Q. And what you can see
is you can see a much larger spread in the size of the constellation,
indicating that you're getting closer and closer to introducing
bit errors in this communication system because of the introduction of the ISI.
So the eye diagrams show the increased ISI.
And they also show you the sensitivity to the sample time placement, right?
So for example, instead of sampling over here, if I had offset in the sample,
you can see that the difference between the high values and the low values
will be smaller.
And you can imagine that as I change the sampling point,
you could also construct a constellation diagram.
And you can expect that those stars that you're seeing
there would expand even more, right.
If I sample, let's say, over here, you can
imagine that you can see the constellation expanding out
so that it actually crosses over into the other quadrants.
So in conclusion, then, what we've seen is
we've seen that the eye diagram and the constellation diagram
can be used to understand or visualize the effect of different phenomena
that occur when I'm dealing with QPSK.
The eye diagram and the constellation diagram
can be used in conjunction with each other.
They each tell us slightly different things.
The eye diagram shows us a little bit more about the actual time trajectory
and how sensitive we are to the sample time,
whereas the constellation diagram would show us
more about the joint relationship between the samples
and the I and the Q channel, whereas that's missing here because we have two
separate eye diagrams, as you can see.