In this video, we're going to be examining
how we can make more efficient use of the wireless spectrum
that we've been allocated.
The technique that we're going to use to do this
is called I/Q or in-phase quadrature modulation.
To understand the problem that we're going to address,
let's look at the amplitude modulation scenario that we've been examining.
So remember, we take a message, and here I
show you the frequency spectrum of that message.
We're going to modulate it by a sinusoid or cosinusoidal carrier,
and that's going to shift the spectrum up
to the range around the carrier frequency f_0.
Now, if we look at the positive frequencies which
the spectrum occupies, we can see here that it occupies a range of BW
over here, but when we modulate it up to around f_0,
we get twice the bandwidth, right?
We get twice the region of spectrum that is,
or twice the width of spectrum, that is being occupied by the signal.
And remember that occurs because of the fact
that when we do the modulation using complex exponentials,
we also have to consider the negative frequencies that
get shifted up into positive frequencies by that modulation process.
And so this is inefficient use of the bandwidth
that we've been given because what we're transmitting
is a signal that only requires this much bandwidth,
or this much space in the spectrum, but now we're
using twice as much space in the spectrum to transmit it.
And so the question is, how can we better use
the space that we've been given?
We're only using about half of what we've been given.
And so the technique that we're going to study to do this
is called I/Q modulation, or in-phase quadrature modulation.
And so for in-phase quadrature modulation, what we're going to do
is we're going to actually transmit two signals.
I'm going to call those m_i and m_q, right, for in-phase and quadrature.
And we're going to transmit those two signals using the same carrier
frequency but with two different phases.
So let's assume first that the two signals that we want to transmit
have the same bandwidth BW.
We're going to take the first one, m_i, and modulate it
by a cosine carrier with frequency f_0, right,
and we're going to call this the in-phase component, which we sometimes
denote by I. We're going to take the other one
and modulate it by a sine wave carrier with exactly the same frequency.
Now, why do we call this in-phase quadrature modulation?
It's because of the fact that the sine wave has a phase shift
of 90 degrees relative to the cosine.
And if we look at entire range of possible phase shifts,
it goes from 0 to 360, one period.
And so 90 is 1/4, right?
So 1/4, and so we talk about those two signals as being in quadrature,
where "quad" refers to 4 or 1/4.
So in this case here, what's going to happen
is that when I modulate up by the sine or the cosine up to around f_0,
I'm still going to get that doubling of bandwidth, right?
So it's still going to occupy 2 times BW.
But what's going to happen is I'm going to be
able to transmit those two signals at exactly
the same time over the same bandwidth and recover them
without the two signals interfering, even though they overlap in frequency.
And so this, then, allows us to make more efficient use of the bandwith
that we've been allocated.
To understand this, we need to take a slightly more nuanced view
of the modulation process that we've been talking about.
So here I show you the spectra of the three signals
that we look at when we're talking about modulation.
We talk about the signal that we're transmitting,
m_i, the cosinusoidal or the sinusoidal carrier,
which I'm going to abbreviate here by either C or S on the other side.
And then finally, the modulated signal, or the product of these two
signals over here.
And I show you the frequency spectrum over here.
And remember, when we're dealing with complex exponentials, those weighting
factors that determine the frequency spectrum, the weighting factors of each
of the complex exponentials in the sum, is itself a complex number.
So we can look at, then, the real part of that complex number
and the imaginary part of that complex number, right?
So when I show you the spectrum here, I'll
show you two spectra, one corresponding to the real part of the coefficient
and the other one to the imaginary part of the Fourier coefficient.
And I can do that for all of these signals that I show you here.
So now let's just focus on this one here,
modulation by the cosinusoidal carrier.
And so I'm going to assume that the spectrum of the signal that we
want to send is purely real.
That's not necessary.
It just makes the analysis a little bit easier.
So when I take the cosinusoidal carrier and I look at its Fourier spectrum,
I know that those two coefficients are purely real, right?
When I look at the cosine alone-- remember
those had magnitude 1/2 here to make the diagrams a little bit easier-- I'm
going to multiply that cosinusoidal carrier by 2, right,
so that the magnitude of these two coefficients are 1.
But they're purely real, and so there's no imaginary component over there.
And so when I do the modulation, it’s exactly what we saw before.
I'm going to get a copy of the spectrum over at f_0 and another one
over at minus f_0.
Now, when I modulate by the sine, I'm going
to assume that I have the quadrature component, right?
It occupies the same bandwidth.
So you can look at this one here and the one over there,
and you can see they have exactly the same width.
I show them with a different shape just to show that they're different signals.
Now I'm going to modulate by a sine wave.
And remember, the sine wave has exactly the same frequency,
but because of that 90-degree phase shift what happens
is that those coefficients are imaginary, right?
Remember, I have to take the difference of the two complex exponentials at f_0
and then divide by j, right?
So when I divide by j, that makes those coefficients imaginary.
And so the spectrum, then, looks like that.
There's one at plus j at minus f_0 and another one
with the magnitude minus j at f_0.
And so what's going to happen, then, is I'm going to do the modulation process.
And so when I multiply that real value spectrum on the top
by the signal with imaginary spectrum that
has only imaginary components in the middle, what I'm going to get
is a shift over in the product to the imaginary side,
as you can see over here.
And I'm going to also modulate or multiply by plus 1 and minus 1,
depending on the sign of these two arrows.
So we can also study the demodulation process that occurs at the receiver,
right?
So remember the first part of that demodulation process is the mixing.
So here are the two signals that I just generated by modulation.
I'm going to show you the real part and the imaginary part.
Now this is the carrier signal that I'm going
to use in the mixing for the demodulation
to shift part of the signal back down to the baseband,
and this will be the mixed signal here.
So we should expect to see a component down here at the baseband.
And so when I do this one here, this is very similar to the kind of things
that we looked at before.
I'm going to get a copy over here at f_0 and minus f_0.
There's going to be an overlap at the origin here in the baseband.
And so I'm going to get the original signal here
that I transmitted if I do the low-pass filtering step.
When we do the analysis for the quadrature component, which
was modulated by the sine wave, we're going to get something very similar
with just a slight change.
So let's take a look at that.
That's what's shown on the right-hand side of the screen over here.
On the top, again, I show you the original modulated signal
that we want to demodulate down to the baseband.
And what I show you in the middle is going
to be the spectrum of the sinusoidal carrier
that we're using for the mixing process.
And so because the spectra there are purely imaginary,
when I do the multiplication I'm going to get imaginary times imaginary, or j
times j.
And that's going to give me a real number, right-- j times j is minus 1--
but a change in sign.
And so what you're to see, then, when I do the modulation is I'm still
going to get that shift over to plus f_0 and minus f_0,
but the spectrum's going to shift over to the real side,
and there's also going to be a flip in sign.
So if we consider modulating by the component at plus f_0,
you can see that has a negative amplitude, right?
It's minus j.
And so you might expect to see a flip in the orientation of these two peaks
here.
So you might expect this one to flip down and this one to flip up.
But because I'm going to shift over to the real part
and I get that change in sign, that's not going to happen.
So you're going to see the spectrum just comes over to the real part
but has the same kind of orientation as we had originally.
When I do the modulation by the component at minus f_0,
I'm going to get that flip, or that change in sign.
So the positive part's going to be flipped up
and the negative part's going to be flipped down, as you can see there,
and it's going to be shifted over.
And so what that does is it ensures that at baseband I
still get that constructive combination of the two signals.
So I can recover the signal at baseband.
But if I compare this signal over here and that signal over there,
there's a slight difference, right?
If I look at the region here around minus 2f_0 and plus 2f_0,
you can see that these two components here
are positive, whereas in the sine wave modulation case
the two components are negative.
In the end, though, that doesn't really matter
because I'm going to apply the low-pass filter to get rid of those components,
and so I only care about what's happening at baseband.
And you can see that the process that happened at baseband
is exactly the same.
So now we have enough to understand what happens with I/Q modulation.
And so here I show you the block diagram of I/Q modulation.
Remember, we have two signals that we want to send, m_i and m_q.
We're going to send them over.
Hopefully we can recover them.
The recovered signal I'm going to call y_i and y_q.
Hopefully m_i is the same as y_i and y_q is the same as m_q.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to take m_i, modulate it by the cosine,
m_q, modulate it by the sine.
And then when I transmit them together, essentially
what that corresponds to is adding those two signals together.
I'm going to get that added combination, and I'm
going to do the demodulation by the cosine and the sine.
And to understand how the two things get transferred over
without interfering with each other in this process,
we're just going to take a look at each of the paths from m_i to y_i, m_q to y_q.
And then I'm also going to look to see what
happens-- how much of the signal from m_i goes to y_q and m_q goes to y_i.
So let's look at this top path from m_i to y_i.
That just turns out be coherent demodulation, right?
I take my spectrum here.
I modulate it by the cosine.
I get the two peaks that get transmitted over.
When I demodulate by exactly the same cosine,
this peak will switch over, or shift up, to f_0.
and minus f_0. I’ll get that constructive combination
at the baseband, which I eliminate with the low-pass filter.
And so I look at the original signal that I transmitted over here
and what's inside the bandwidth of the low-pass filter over here,
and those two things are exactly the same.
So I can recover the original signal that I sent
if that's all that I sent over here.
Suppose that I only send the quadrature component.
Very similar analysis happens.
We actually saw this already in the previous slides.
I get the spectrum here.
It gets modulated.
It becomes purely imaginary, so I denote that by j and minus j over here.
But when I demodulate by the sinusoidal component there,
you can see that within the baseband frequency here and over here,
which is passed by the low-pass filter, the two components
are exactly the same.
So I can recover the original signal.
But when I send m_i, for example, I'm also
going to see something down at y_q, right?
Because if I send m_i alone, it's going to go through here,
and it's going to get modulated by the cosine here, as well as the sine.
So let's take a look at what happens from m_i to y_q.
Now, that's the example that we talked about previously, right?
What I'm doing is I'm demodulating or mixing by a signal that's
90 degrees out of phase.
And what we saw before is that that's going
to result in a component at the baseband where the components interfere
destructively, right?
They combine destructively, and so they disappear.
The baseband component disappears.
And so we can see that here.
The modulation gives us the two frequency components
at f_0 and minus f_0.
Now when I demodulate it, I get a flip in sign over here.
And so the component at baseband corresponding to this shift over here
will be negative.
This one over here will be positive.
And so I get the positive and the negative over here.
But then they'll interfere destructively over here,
and I won't get anything inside the bandwidth of the low-pass filter.
I do get something outside the bandwidth of the low-pass filter,
but that's going to be eliminated.
So I won't see anything, even though I'm transmitting something here.
I won't see anything at the output y_q.
Very similar analysis holds for m_q to y_i.
The only difference is that the spectra look slightly different here
because I modulate by the sine wave.
The spectrum becomes imaginary.
I get a positive and a negative amplitude component over here.
But when I combine those two together, I get the signal
that you can see over there.
So then combining everything, then, what you can see
is that for I/Q communication we have a relatively complex picture.
But individually, we have already seen all
of the kind of things that happened.
And so bear with this picture a little bit.
We have the two signals, m_i and m_q.
These are the in-phase and quadrature components.
And what we hope to see on the other side when we transmit,
or when we recover the signal, is that in the baseband at y_i
we get the original signal, which we can see here.
Nothing in the quadrature component over here,
or the imaginary part of the spectrum, from the quadrature component
because even though there is something that gets sent over,
inside the baseband there's nothing.
And these get eliminated by the low-pass filter.
And then the same thing for the bottom.
What I had over here was that the quadrature component was sent over.
You can see it's recovered in the real part of the baseband of y_q.
And there is some leakage from m_i into y_q,
but that occurs at higher frequencies that
are eliminated by the low-pass filter.
Now, one of the questions you might have is,
well, we saw before with the regular amplitude,
the single-amplitude modulation, that there
was a problem with the 90-degree phase shift.
If we had a 90-degree phase shift, then all of sudden our signals disappeared.
And so the question is, well, what happens
if I have a 90-degree phase shift, in this case, with I/Q communication,
right?
And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to look
at the modulating signal over here.
I'm going to look at the mixer over here,
and I'm going to introduce a 90-degree phase shift from this guy to this guy.
So I'm going to get a sine where I get a cosine and a cosine where I get a sine.
So you can see that over here.
So I get a 90-degree phase shift.
And because of the 90-degree phase shift, when I go from sine,
I get minus cosine over there.
Now, if I do the analysis of this one here, what you can see
is that if I, for example, look at the path from m_i
to y_i, before I wanted to see this one in the real part
of the spectrum in the baseband, right?
But what happens is that I get these two peaks here.
But when I demodulate, one of them flips upside down over here,
and the other one remains unchanged except shifted by minus f_0.
So when I combine this one with this one,
again I get that destructive interference,
and so that signal is going to disappear.
Also, because this is imaginary, the sine,
it's going to shift over to the imaginary component over here.
So what's going to happen is that when I go from here to here,
it's going to end up in the imaginary part, and it's going to disappear.
So that is what we saw before.
But what you can see is that if I look at the other component, right,
if I go from here and I look at what happens over here,
you can see that here I'm modulating by a cosine.
In this path I'm modulating by a cosine.
It's just flipped in sign.
And so what's going to happen is I am going to see in that case something
at the baseband.
It's just going to be flipped in sign.
But that flip in sign doesn't really change the signal substantially, right?
I just have to multiply by minus 1 to get the original signal back.
And so what happens with the quadrature component is before what we saw
is that we saw it on the y_q, but now it doesn't show up in y_q.
It actually shows up in y_i.
So in conclusion, then, what happens with the 90-degree phase shift
is that the I and Q channels get swapped at the receiver, right?
So whatever came in at the transmitter at I actually comes out at Q,
and whatever came in at Q comes out at I.
But the key point here is that nothing is lost.
No information is lost.
It just got rearranged a little bit.
And so you can also ask the question, well,
what happens if I don't have exactly a 90-degree phase shift?
What's going to happen in that case?
And in that case, what you're going to have is
you're going to have a combination of the original case,
with 0 phase shift and 90-degree phase shift, right?
And so you can expect that at the, let's say, in-phase output,
you're going to then get a mixture of both
the in-phase and quadrature components.
But it turns out if I look at those and I
know what the phase shift is, I can actually still
recover the original data given the known phase shift.