In this video we're going to talk about Quadrature Phase Shift Keying, which
is a way of transmitting digital data while making more efficient use
of the spectrum than we saw with BPSK.
And essentially, the idea is to combine the ideas of BPSK
with the I/Q modulation that we just talked
about to get digital I/Q modulation.
So here I show you, in the center here, I show you the I/Q modulation
that we just talked about, and what I'm going
to do is simply send two signals, m_i and m_q, which
are encodings of digital data.
For example, here it might be 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, and so on.
And I'm going to do that by taking each one bit
and holding the signal constant plus A for a certain amount of time, the bit
time, and each 0 bit, and holding the signal constant at minus A for the bit
time.
And then creating that waveform like we did in Part One,
modulating it by either the cosine or the sine,
depending on whether I'm looking at the in-phase or quadrature component,
then transmitting those two things at the same time.
In other words, adding them together and transmitting them over,
and I can just do the demodulation.
And the only thing I've done here is I've
added to the output of low pass filter, where
I'm going to recover the original signal back,
I need to get the original bitstream back,
so I'm just going to subsample at the points here shown in red.
And when I do that subsampling, I'm going
to compare each of the sample points with the threshold here,
let's say in the middle, and I'm going to get 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, and so on.
So this digital modulation scheme, then, is a fairly straightforward combination
of the ideas of BPSK with in-phase quadrature modulation.
And so we call this quadrature phase shift keying.
And the question you might ask is well, why
do you call this quadrature phase shift keying,
because it seems like what you're really doing is amplitude modulation, right?
You take the signal here, you multiply it by the cosinusoidal carrier,
and so you're just changing the amplitude of that cosinusoidal carrier.
So to answer that question, what we're going to do
is we're going to look at the four different signals we might
send within a particular bit period.
So remember, the modulating signals hold the amplitude constant for one bit
period.
And so if we look within that bit period,
and we look at what's being transmitted, we're going to, remember,
modulate the signal, we call the modulated signal x,
and we're going to combine the in phase and quadrature
components by summing them and transmitting them at the same time
here.
So there are different possible combinations
because in-phase and the quadrature components
can either have a bit value of 1 or 0, right?
So there's four possible combinations.
And in each of those four possible combinations,
I'm going to send a different waveform during that bit time.
So for example, if I look at the case here when the in-phase bit is 0
and the quadrature bit is 0, remember I'm
going to multiply the carrier in that case by minus A. In this case
I assume A is equal to 1.
So I just get minus cosine 2 pi f_0 t, and minus sine 2 pi f_0 t.
And so what I'm doing here is I'm adding a cosine
and assign that have exactly the same frequency.
And so turns out that what I get with that summation
is exactly just a cosine with exactly the frequency f_0,
but there's a phase shift and a change in the amplitude.
And that's shown over here on this side over here.
Because I've combined these two things together, (They each have amplitude 1.),
and I combine them.
They're kind of orthogonal, or 90 degrees, with respect to each other.
When I take that total amplitude, I'm going to get square root of 2.
And then to see the phase shift, you can look at this
and imagine I'm talking about the complex plane
where the cosine corresponds to the real part,
the sine corresponds to the imaginary part, and so here, I get minus 1,
minus 1.
And so if I look at the phase of this one here, relative the origin,
you can see that I go through a negative phase shift of minus 3 pi over 4.
And so for all the other combinations, I get very similar analysis.
For example, let's look at this one here, 1, 0.
In this case here, I modulate the cosine by plus 1, the sine by minus 1,
that corresponds to this place over here.
And now you can look at this and you can see the phase shift here
is minus pi over 4, as shown over here.
So you can go through all of the other combinations in a similar way,
and what you can notice here is that I'm sending
for each of these four different combinations
a cosine signal that has the same amplitude.
And so if I examine it in this way, the amplitude is not changing.
The only thing that's changing is the phase.
And you can see, for those four different signals,
there are four different values of the phase,
and they are all equally spaced, right?
So I go around 1/4 of a turn each time from one phase value to the other,
and so that's why I call this quadrature phase shift keying, because I've
taken the entire phase space, 360 degrees,
and broken it into four different values.