Let's review what we learned about filters and the frequency domain
analysis of signals.
So when we talk about a filter, we started
by talking about this water filter here where
we have the idea that we might want to take dirty water here and filter it
so that it comes out cleaner on the other end of the filter.
And so, when we talk about the operation of this filter,
we have the idea that the input to the filter here, the dirty water,
consists of different components.
Those components might be water, which we want to drink,
but also some impurities, which we don't want to drink.
And those impurities might have different sizes
and we know that, for example, water filters typically
operate by filtering out very, very large particles or relatively
large particles so that only the water passes through.
Ideally what we would want is only the water passing through this filter
but, in fact, what happens is that a small amount of the smaller
particles or let's say a relatively large amount of the small particles
pass through but a very, very small percentage of the very, very
large particles pass through. So this water here is cleaner
than this water is over here.
And so these numbers here, 100%, 90%, 10%, describing
how much of each component passes through the filter,
characterize the operation of the filter.
And if I know those numbers, then I can get
a determination of how good that filter, or how well that filter, is
filtering the water.
Now, we can take this idea and actually apply it to the communication channel
that we discussed in Part One.
We're going to take the input signal and we're going to get an output signal
and somehow the input signal and the output signal
are related to each other.
And the way that they're related to each other
is that the input signal has components, just like this one has components,
and some of those components pass through the channel largely unchanged
and other of the components are blocked or don't pass through that channel.
And so then the key question then that we
had is if we're going to take this interpretation of a filter
as blocking some components and passing other components,
what are those components inside the input signal?
And the answer we gave to that was given by Fourier Analysis
and we saw two types of Fourier Analysis: the Fourier
Series and the Fourier Transform.
And what the Fourier Series expansion did is it took a signal, x of n,
any signal, any sampled data signal containing N points,
capital N points, and it expressed it as a sum of N divided
by 2 plus 1 cosinusoidal components.
The cosinusoidal components had different frequencies
but for any signal with N samples, those frequencies were all the same.
They all had that stereotypical form, f_k is equal to k divided by N,
where k runs from 0 to N divided by 2.
That was what we call the normalized frequency.
So there were N divided by 2 plus 1 normalized frequencies.
But, of course, because signals differ, what
happens is that the values of A_k and phi_k in that equation
differ from signal to signal.
The values of A_k turn out to be a little bit more important
than the values of phi_k because they determine
the size of those cosinusoidal components, or how much of that
frequency component is contained within the signal.
The phase shifts phi introduce shifts in the cosinusoidal components, shifts
in time due to those phase delays.
The Fourier Transform is an alternative decomposition of the signal.
It also uses this idea of frequency but it decomposes the signal
into a sum of scaled complex exponentials
where now, the scaling factors can be themselves complex numbers.
And so because the scaling factor can be a complex number,
it has both a magnitude and a phase just like we required here
in the Fourier Series, a magnitude A sub k, and a phase.
And so it turns out that these two things are equivalent.
So if I know, for example, the Fourier series,
I can find the Fourier Transform and vice versa.
Given this one I can find the A_k’s and phi_k’s.
And so this Fourier Analysis then allows us to decompose a signal
or take the signal and decompose it into the sum of signals
at different frequencies, and we characterize the signal
by how much of each frequency does it have inside.
And so the measurement of how much of each frequency
it has inside, or the characterization of that, is called the Amplitude Spectrum.
And so I show you here a signal. It has only three frequency components.
It has a DC offset, or a constant offset,
at 1 around which the signal is oscillating.
It has a slow oscillation, once over the entire range of 256 samples,
and another one that oscillates up and down 10 times.
And the slow variation is relatively larger.
And we can see that in the Amplitude Spectrum here.
We can see a component here at 0 corresponding to the constant
offset and then a component at 1 corresponding
to that slow variation and another component at 10 corresponding
to the fast variation that goes up and down 10 times.
We can also characterize this using the sum of complex exponentials
and there what we can see is that, instead
of only using positive frequencies, we also have to use negative frequencies.
But there is a certain symmetry about the Fourier Transform
when we're dealing with real valued signals
such that, if I look at the amplitude, the amplitude of the positive 1
frequency component is going to be exactly
the same as the amplitude of the minus 1 frequency component and, in fact,
it's going to be half that of the Fourier Series expansion, A_1.
So this gives us a way of characterizing a signal
in terms of what kind of frequency components does it contain?
Once we know what kind of frequency components are contained in the input,
then we can talk about what happens when I send it
through a channel or, in general, any LTI or linear time invariant system.
And what we saw was that if I take a single frequency component,
that would be a single cosine, and I pass that through any linear time
invariant system, what's going to come out of the output
is going to be that same component, right?
So the component is going to come in and it's going to go out.
It’s going to be the same component, but it's going to be slightly modified.
What's going to happen is, it's going to have the same frequency
but it's going to be shifted in phase by an amount, phi, or theta in this case,
and it's going to be scaled in magnitude by an amount, S.
And so those scaling factors and phase shifts
are going to be frequency dependent.
Now in understanding the operation of this linear time invariant system
it turns out that the most critical thing
to understand is really, usually, the amplitude response
or, how does that scaling factor vary with frequency.
Because the scaling factor tells you how much of that component gets through.
So going back to the original water filter example
that we talked about at the beginning, we
have these numbers characterizing the performance of the filter.
It's saying 100% of the water gets through but only 1%
of the large particles get through.
And so there what we're saying is that the different components
are filtered in different amounts depending upon their size.
What a linear time invariant system does is it does the same kind of filtering,
except for instead of filtering by size, it filters by frequency.
So those numbers, instead of describing what
happens to different sizes of particles, the numbers
tell you what happens to different frequency components.
And we talked about different kinds of filters, the lowpass filter,
the bandpass filter, and the highpass filter,
that differ according to what kind of frequencies pass through the filter.
For the lowpass filter it's mainly low frequencies, which are slowly
varying changes, that pass through.
And we saw that the communication channel
that we talked about in Part One of the class
was an example of a lowpass filter.
So in summary then, when we're talking about filters
it's very natural to talk about a decomposition of the signal
into different frequency components.
We also use that idea when we are talking about lossy source encoding.
And the idea then is that any signal can be decomposed
into a sum of different frequency components
and they just contain the same frequency components, just in different amounts.
And what a filter can do is adjust or modify
the amount of the frequency content of that signal when
it passes through that filter.