Let's review what we've learned about sharing
a channel in wireless communications.
In wireless communication, when we're sharing channel
we call that process multiplexing.
There are many different ways we can do multiplexing.
And in this course, we focused on the idea
of frequency division multiplexing.
Frequency division multiplexing is commonly
used even for other kinds of things like CDMA,
you can think of-- you may have heard as being Co-Division Multiple Access,
but still that technology still uses frequency division multiplexing.
So frequency division multiplexing is a critical component
in any wireless communication system.
The idea of frequency division multiplexing
is that we have this air channel that we can transmit over.
We're going to transmit information using radio waves.
But we can change the frequency of the radio waves
that we're using to transmit the information.
And so the whole spectrum or range of frequencies that we can transmit over
is known as the radio spectrum and that's vast.
It turns out that it's also quite crowded,
so even though there's a lot of room there it
seems like, it's quite crowded.
So here I show you the frequency allocations within the United States
of what different bands are enabled or allowed for use for what
different applications.
And you can see as I go across each row here,
I'm looking at different frequencies.
And the color blocks show you what's been allocated.
And pretty much everything has been allocated, so it's quite crowded.
And so if we are granted the use of a certain region of that frequency
spectrum to use, we can't go into other people's space, because it's so crowded.
And so we number 1, have to make sure that we
can get the space, and number 2, that we can use the space
and stay with inside that space.
One of the key problems, though, with wireless communication
is typically the signals that we want to transmit do not exist in the frequency
spectrum that we've been allocated.
So for example, if we're transmitting voice data,
that's typically in the range of a few kilohertz.
But in CDMA or a 3G channel, we might be talking on the range of 2 gigahertz.
And so what we need to do in wireless communication then
is take the signals that we want to transmit,
which are typically at a low frequency called the baseband,
and move them up into the frequency range
where we've been allocated where we can transmit.
And so that process of moving the signals from baseband
up into that region where we can transmit is known as modulation.
And the way we do that with frequency division multiplexing is
we take a signal m of t and multiply it by a carrier
signal c of t, which is a cosine signal or a sine wave signal.
Here I assume that it's a cosine signal.
And we saw that we can analyze this in the frequency domain
by looking at the spectrum of m of t, which
I call M of f; the spectrum of the modulating signal-- sorry,
the carrier signal C of t, which I'll call C of f.
And we saw that when we do the multiplication here, what happens
is we get a copy of the original spectrum at the two peaks over there,
at f_0 and minus f_0.
And so that process is shown graphically like this.
And so the resulting spectrum at the output that I'm transmitting here
is translated from that baseband around 0
up to a frequency around f_0 and minus f_0.
However, one of the disadvantages of this modulation process
is now the amount of radio spectrum that we occupy is now twice as big.
We can see this in the complex domain.
If we look there, we have one region approximately this size over here.
But now we have two regions over here.
So when we do that modulation process, we're using twice as much space
as we were originally using.
And so we're going to have to have some way of dealing with that.
So we can use this basic modulation technique to transmit digital data.
And if we do that, we get a process which
is called binary phase shift keying.
We can create a modulating signal just by taking a bit sequence
and if there's a 1, we hold it constant at plus A for a certain amount of time
called the bit time.
And if it's 0, we hold it constant at minus A for a certain amount of time.
And we get this wave form m of t, which we can then multiply by the carrier
in order to get the signal to transmit. So that will take this signal
and translate it up into that frequency range around f 0.
However, remember I told you that the radio frequency
spectrum is very crowded.
And so I'm not allowed to move over into other places,
other regions of the space, which have been allocated for other uses.
The problem, though, with this waveform here
is that it has a lot of frequency components
that are very, very high, because of the fact
it has these very, very sharp transitions over here.
So here I'm showing you the spectrum of the signal.
And if I take this one and I shift it over to around f_0, what will happen
is that those higher frequency components
will leak or spread out into other people's frequency space
that I'm not allowed to use.
So in order to avoid that problem what we do is we apply a low pass filter.
That cuts off or doesn't allow these higher frequency components
to pass through, resulting in that orange spectrum,
so that when I translate that up to the frequency around f_0,
you can see that I only occupy a very narrow range around f_0.
There is a disadvantage, though, to adding this low pass filter.
And that can be seen if I look at the time wave form here and here.
What we can see here is that we have these very, very sharp transitions.
But after I pass through the low pass filter, which cuts out
the high frequencies or the quickly varying components,
you can see that those transitions have been blurred out
or become much slower over here.
And we saw in Part One that this phenomenon
is known as intersymbol interference.
And that can limit the rate at which we can transmit information.
So we have to be very careful when we design that low pass filter.
In any event, now that we know how to take the digital data
and translate it up to that frequency spectrum
that we're allowed to transmit in, we need to figure out
how to bring that back down.
And that process is called demodulation.
Demodulation consists of two steps.
The first one is mixing, and the second step is low pass filtering.
In the mixing step, what we do is we take the received signal
and multiply it by the carrier, which is the cosinusoidal carrier.
I show you the spectrum of the received signal
on the top and the spectrum of the carrier on the middle.
And what happens when we multiply those two signals is
I get a copy of the original spectrum translated up
to f_0 and another copy translated down to minus f_0.
And what you can see is that there's a component there at the baseband which
constructively combines in order to get a copy of the original signal
that we transmitted.
However, there are two additional components up at 2f_0 and minus 2f_0.
But the second step, the low pass filtering,
can be used to get rid of that.
So now that we understand the demodulation process,
we can use that to recover the original data that we originally
transmitted using BPSK.
So when we did the BPSK, we took a signal
and we modulated the carrier by that binary signal, which
resulted in two different waveforms, one like this for a 1 and the other one
like this for a 0.
We can recover the original waveform by just taking this and doing
the demodulation process, multiplying by the cosine, and then low pass
filtering, giving that yellow waveform over there.
Now, in order to recover the original digital data, what we have to do
is essentially the process that we did in Part One.
We have to look at the yellow waveform,
subsample it at points which are shown in red,
and then compare the value of the signal at those points to the threshold
to recover the original digital data, in this case 101101.
Even though we can transmit digital data using BPSK,
we're not making the most efficient use of the spectrum, because of the fact
that when we do the modulation process, the amount of spectrum that we're using
doubles.
In order to address that problem, we introduce the idea of IQ modulation,
or In-phase Quadrature modulation.
In this kind of architecture, what we do is we have two signals
now, M_i and M_q, which are different.
And I call this one here the in-phase component
and this one the quadrature component.
And what I do is I take these and I modulate them
by carriers with exactly the same frequency, f_0.
But they're displaced in phase by 90 degrees.
And so we call those two signals being in phase quadrature.
Now, it turns out that when I modulate this by a frequency f_0,
I'm going to shift these two signals, which
I assume have the same bandwidth, up into the same frequency range
so they still occupy the frequency range that I've been allocated.
But now I can transmit those two things together at the same time
over that frequency range.
And once I get to the receiver, I can recover the two components just
by modulating by the cosine component, which
will give me the in-phase component, and by the sine carrier, which
will give me the quadrature component, as shown on the right-hand side.
We can use that in-phase quadrature modulation scheme
to transmit digital data by creating the modulating signals using
the exact same technique that we used for binary phase shift keying.
The resulting system that we get is called quadrature phase shift keying.
So what we're going to do is we're going to take now two bitstreams,
create two modulating signals by holding the waveforms constant over the bit
time at different values depending on whether the bit is 0 or 1,
modulate these two signals by the in-phase and quadrature carriers
at the same frequency.
That's going to translate them up into the same frequency range.
Then I'm going to be able to transmit them over the channel
to the other side, where I can recover the in-phase and quadrature
components by modulating by the cosine signal and the sine signal.
Noise might be introduced during that transmission process.
In addition, I shouldn't transmit these ones,
but I should do low pass filtering in order
to restrict the bandwidth to avoid leaking into other people's spectrum.
And so the waveform that I'm going to get on the other side
is not going to be exactly the same as one that I get on this side.
And so that has a potential of introducing bit errors.
And so to visualize that effect, we introduce the concept
of the constellation diagram.
The constellation diagram for this particular situation
is shown on the bottom here.
And the way we constructed that was we took the received waveform
and sampled it at the places we are going to make the bit decisions
and plotted those measured data at the sample
points for both in-phase and quadrature components on a two-dimensional plane.
And by overlaying all of these plots, we get many, many different points
or stars within our constellation.
And the spread of the points in each region
here gives us an idea of the effect of noise and intersymbol interference.
And what we'd like to see is those clusters at each of those four
different regions be as concentrated as possible,
so that we get reliable transmission.
In summary, we've seen that we can share the wireless communication
channel by using the fact that there's a wide range of different frequencies
that we can transmit over.
Governments divide that frequency spectrum up into different regions
and allocate that to different users or different applications.
And given a particular region of frequency that we're allowed to use,
we can take the signals that we have and translate them
into those frequencies using modulation, translating them back down
after reception using demodulation.
And we can make sure that we can efficiently
use the spectrum by using the technique of in-phase quadrature
modulation that we talked about.
And finally, we get a digital transmission system that we understand
now, which is quadrature phase shift keying,
which is quite comparable to a lot of the techniques that are being used
in the state-of-the-art communication systems.