Aliasing is an interesting phenomena that occurs when we sample a sine wave,
and it can be understood using the complex exponential.
So let's consider the problem of sampling a cosine.
So suppose we have a continuous cosine, x tilde
where I'm going to use tilde to indicate continuous time quantities.
So I'm going to talk about f tilde as being the continuous frequency.
And so this cosine wave that we see over here is a 1 hertz sine wave.
So it repeats itself once every second.
So on the top here, I have seconds.
Now, suppose that I sample this at a sampling frequency, Fs.
In this case, I'll choose a sampling frequency of 6 hertz.
And so that means I'm going to be sampling it at these points over here.
Now, I know that when I sample these things here,
I'm going to get a discrete time waveform, as seen over here
where each of the green dots here indicates a sample point,
and I can index those by an index n, where
the relationship between the index n and the original cosine wave
is shown on the right hand side over there.
So x n is equal to cosine 2 pi f n, where
f is what we call the normalized frequency, which
is the ratio of f tilde, the continuous frequency divided by the sampling
frequency F_s.
And so aliasing describes an interesting phenomenon
that occurs when the frequency of the continuous time cosine wave
is too high in comparison with the sampling frequency F_s.
And in that case what happens is that it is aliased to
or it looks like a cosine wave, but a different cosine wave.
It doesn't look like the original cosine wave,
but it looks like a cosine wave with a lower frequency.
So to show you that here, what I show you on the top slide here,
or the top plot there, is a plot of the sampling
situation we talked about before.
I have a 1 hertz sine wave sampled at a 6 hertz sampling frequency.
On the bottom here, I show you a 5 hertz continuous time sine wave.
And if I sample it at exactly the same sample
points, so exactly the same sampling frequency, Fs, is
equal to 6 hertz, what you can see is I get these sample
points that are shown here.
And if I look at those sample points, those
are exactly the same sample points that I got
when I sampled the 1 hertz cosine wave.
So from the point of view of the samples,
we have no idea whether there was a 1 hertz sine wave there
or a 5 hertz sine wave.
So the 5 hertz sine wave is kind of disguising itself
or is aliasing as a 1 hertz sine wave.
And so the question then is what is the maximum limit
that we can put in as the continuous time sine wave
before we run into this aliasing phenomenon?
And that limit then is called the Nyquist limit.
And so to understand the Nyquist limit, let's just look at the samples
and see what the conditions are on the normalized frequency.
So if we just look at the samples as cosine 2 pi f n,
then I know that because the cosine function is periodic with period 2 pi,
then if I add 2 pi or any multiple of 2 pi to that, right, so if I,
in particular, if I add 2 pi n to that, I'm
going to get exactly the same value.
So cosine 2 pi f n and cosine f n minus 2 pi n,
since that's a constant multiple of 2 pi, are going to be exactly the same.
Now, what I can do is I can separate the 2 pi at the beginning
and factor out the n at the end, and what
I get is 2 cosine 2 pi f minus 1 n.
And since I can change the sign inside the cosine without changing it's value,
I can flip f minus 1 and 1 minus f without changing the value there.
And so now what you can see is there's a critical point when f passes 1/2,
because when f passes 1/2 then this cosine 2 pi f n will appear as a lower
frequency, as we can see over here.
So for example, suppose f was 0.75, then if f was 0.75 here,
it would actually look like an equivalent frequency of 0.25.
So it would like a lower frequency, 1 minus f.
Equivalently, since the normalized frequency
f is given by f tilde divided by Fs, then
the Nyquist limit can be expressed in continuous time
by saying that if I have a continuous time cosine with frequency
f bigger than 1/2 the sampling frequency, and 1/2
the sampling frequency is commonly called the Nyquist limit, then
that continuous time cosine will be aliased.
It will look like a lower frequency sine wave
or cosine wave than it actually is.
Now, we can also get a pictorial or graphical interpretation of aliasing
if we use complex exponentials.
So if we use a complex exponential and we
consider sampling a complex exponential, then if I consider,
let's say the value of a sampled complex exponential at sample k plus 1,
then I can just distribute this as 2 pi fk and 2 pi f.
And you know that if I add two things in the exponent,
it's the same thing as multiplying two exponentials together.
So I can separate those two things out as e to the j 2 pi f and e to the j 2
pi fk.
And I can see that this thing over here, e to the j 2 pi fk,
is just the sampled complex exponential at sample k.
So remember what happens when the complex exponential oscilliated. It rotates
around the origin.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to freeze
that rotation at different points in time determined by the sample index k.
So for example, if I have that complex exponential
rotating around and at sample k, it's exactly here,
colinear with the real axis here.
Then at the next time instant, it's going to rotate by an amount 2 pi f.
And in this case here, I've set f is equal to 0.25.
So it makes a quarter of a turn, or a quarter of a rotation,
before the next sample.
So 2 pi times 1 over 4 is pi over 2 and so that's 90 degrees.
Now, aliasing is going to occur when f is bigger than 0.5.
In other words, it's going to rotate by more than half way.
So 0.5 means it rotates by exactly a half.
So if it rotates by more than a half, what's going to happen
is it's going to look like a similar rotation,
and so I show you that on the bottom.
So suppose that the frequency was equal to 0.75.
Then in that case, what's going to happen
is that the thing's going to rotate by 3/4,
so it's going to go all the way around halfway and then come around again.
And so if I look at that, that looks exactly the same
as an equivalent rotation, but in the opposite direction by 0.25.
And so in fact, we can often see this in movies.
And sometimes people call this the wagon-wheel effect, especially
in older movies.
Sometimes, you'll see a wheel in a movie and it'll actually
look like the wheel is rotating backwards, even
though the car or the wagon is going forward.
And so that's because of the fact that if I have a movie, it actually
consists of frames or discrete images that are sampled in time.
And so that is exactly what's happening with aliasing.