In order to understand the discrete Fourier transform,
we're going to have to understand something about complex numbers.
So if we define j to be the square root of minus 1,
we call that an imaginary number, then we can define a complex number
to be the sum of a real number, a, and an imaginary number, jb, where b is just
a real number scaling j.
And so we call a the real part of that complex number, z,
and b to be the imaginary part of z.
We can represent that number in what we call the complex plane, which
is a two-dimensional plane, where the horizontal axis corresponds
to the real part of z, and the vertical axis
corresponds to the imaginary part of z.
And so the complex number then is just a point at a comma b.
We can also talk about the complex conjugate of a complex number z,
just by taking the imaginary part and flipping the sign, as we show here.
There's several properties of complex numbers.
For example, we can add and multiply two complex numbers.
It turns out that it's relatively easy to understand addition,
in terms of vector addition.
So if we have two complex numbers, z_1 and z_2,
those are points or vectors in the complex plane
at a_1, b_1 and a_2, b_2.
We can add those two things together just by simple vector addition,
as we show here to get the sum.
Now multiplication, we can do by the formula shown on the bottom.
That looks a little bit complicated, but essentially what it is
is simply just the binomial expansion of those two binomials there.
But we can get a more pictorial representation of multiplication
if we think about complex numbers, using what we call a polar representation.
So with a polar representation, what we do is
we represent that complex number, which is a point in the complex plane,
in terms of its distance from the origin.
We'll call that the magnitude of z.
And we can obtain that just by taking a² plus b²
squared and then square root.
And then we also talk about the angle of the vector from the x-axis
or the real axis, as we show there.
And we can obtain that by taking the arc tangent of b divided by a.
Now given the magnitude and the angle, we can also go back to a and b,
just by taking the magnitude times the cosine, or the sine of that angle.
We can also understand the complex conjugate,
which remember is obtained by flipping the sign of the imaginary part.
And all that happens when we take the complex conjugate
is we take that vector and we just flip the angle from angle of z
to the minus angle of z, and keep the magnitude the same.
Now once we understand the polar representation, what we can do
is get a more pictorial understanding of multiplication of two complex numbers.
So if I have two complex numbers, z_1 and z_2,
and I want to take their product, which I'll call z,
I can break that down into two operations.
One is I can compute a new angle, which is
the angle of the product, which is just the sum of the two angles of z_1 and z_2.
So if I know the angle of z_1 and the angle of z_2,
then the product will just have the sum of those two,
so I can just take a rotation by a little bit.
And then I'm going to scale the magnitude by the magnitude of z_2,
and I'm going to get the product.
So multiplication then in the complex domain
becomes a rotation by the angle of z_2, and then
a scaling by the magnitude of z_2.