In order to understand the discrete Fourier transform,
we need to understand the complex exponential.
The exponential function is defined by a power series.
So if I take the terms 1, x, x squared divided by 2 factorial,
x cubed divided by 3 factorial, and so on.
In general x to the n divided by n factorial,
and I add those all together.
If I let n go to infinity, then I get the exponential function e to the x.
Now x is normally thought of as being real,
but because we can add and multiply complex numbers,
we can actually stick x being a complex number in there,
and get what's called the complex exponential.
Now to understand the complex exponential,
let's just start by reviewing quickly the real valued exponential.
And I'll be looking at the real valued exponential as a function of time,
so I'll say x of t is equal to c times e to the at.
And if I plot t on the horizontal axis over here,
and then if I look at the yellow curve over here, then what I see
is that the exponential function goes up quite quickly after t is bigger than 0.
At t is equal to 0, I get c times e to the 0, which is 1, so I just get c.
Now if I change the sign of a, right?
If I make a negative, then I get something that decays exponentially,
rather than increasing exponentially.
If I change a, what will happen is that the rate of increase will increase,
as you see over here.
So the slope here increases that we see over there.
And the value c is just a scaling factor, right?
So if I take c and I make it bigger or smaller,
that's just going to make that curve bigger or smaller proportionally.
And if I change the sign of c, all that happens
is that the yellow curve flips over to the other side,
and instead of going up exponentially, it will go down exponentially.
The exponential actually has some nice properties, especially when
I multiply them together.
So if I take two exponentials, e to the at, and e to the bt,
and I multiply them together, then all I have to do is add the exponents.
So I just get at plus bt, or more simply a plus b times t.
If I take the division of two exponentials, right?
So e to the at divided by e to the bt, then
all I have to do is subtract bt from at, and so I get e to the quantity
a minus b times t.
As a special case of that, if I replace a with 0,
then I just get e to the 0, which is 1.
And so I get 1 divided by e to the bt, is just e to the minus bt.
If I take the power of an exponential, so e to the at, to the nth power,
then all I have to do is multiply n times whatever is in the exponent,
so in that case it would be n times a times t.
Now Euler's identity allows us to look at the complex exponential
in the simplest case where the argument is purely imaginary.
So right here I have a purely imaginary argument,
so I'm going to call it e to the j 2pi ft,
and so that's another function of time.
And so if I just take e to the j 2pi ft and I just take j to the 2pi ft,
and substitute it into that power series for the exponential,
I'll get what's shown here, right?
So this was x, and x squared divided by 2 factorial,
x cubed divided by 3 factorial, where x is just this thing inside here.
Now, remember that j is the square root of minus 1, right?
So if I square j, right?
I'll just get minus 1.
And in fact, for every even power, what I'll get is another real number, right?
So if I just take all the even powers of this power series, then what I'll get
is a real number here, which starts out with 1
and then is a minus 2 pi ft quantity squared divided by 2 factorial.
On the next one, I'll have j to the fourth, which will
be minus 1 times minus 1, or plus 1.
So I'll get a plus 2 pi ft quantity to the fourth divided by 4 factorial,
and so on.
For all the odd powers, it turns out that those remain imaginary, right?
So here's an odd power, the first power, so that I'll just get j times 2pi ft.
And then when I take the cubic, what I'll get is I'll get a change in sign,
it will still be imaginary.
But I'll get j times minus 1 because j cubed is just j times j squared
and j squared is minus 1.
So we're got a minus 1 times the real part of what's shown over there.
So 2pi ft quantity cubed divided by 3 factorial.
And the next one we'll flip in sign similarly to this one here,
so I get plus the quantity 2pi ft to the fifth power divided by 5 factorial,
and so on.
So if I look at this power series here, what
you can see is that this power series here is actually the power series
or Taylor series expansion of the cosine function, so I get cosine of 2pi ft.
And what's shown over there, multiplying j,
is actually the Taylor series expansion of sine.
So I get this equation here relating the complex exponential
to trigonometric functions cosine and sine.
And so what this tells us then is, if I put an imaginary input
into the exponential function, what I'll get is a complex number output,
and we can look at that complex number in the complex plane.
So here I show you e to the j pi ft.
And remember it's a complex number with real part cosine 2pi ft
and imaginary part sine 2pi ft.
I can think about its polar representation,
so remember that breaks it down into the distance from the origin, which
since cosine squared plus sine squared is equal to 1 is just always 1.
And an angle here, where the angle is just
given by the arc tangent of the imaginary part divided
by the real part, and since sine divided by cosine is tangent,
then the arctangent and the tangent just cancel, and so I just get 2pi ft.
So the angle here would just be 2pi ft.
And if I think about what happens when t increases, what's going to happen
is just this angle is going to increase, right?
So the distance from the origin is always going to be 1,
but the angle will increase, and so what you can see here
is what I'm going to get is a rotation of the complex exponential
around the origin, where it's always going
to be a unit distance from the origin.
So it's going to trace out a circle, we call that circle the unit circle,
and you can see that that's going to repeat, right?
And so that's going to repeat with a period which is given by 1 over f.
So f is the frequency with which the complex exponential
is rotating around the origin.
The larger the value of f, the faster that rotation is going to be.
Now when I'm looking at the complex exponential,
I can also talk about its complex conjugate.
So remember when we take the complex conjugate,
what we're going to do is just going to flip the sign of the imaginary part,
so I get minus sine 2pi ft.
And the only thing that's going to happen there is it's
just going to change the angle to be minus 2pi ft,
the magnitude won't change.
And so what that tells me then is that the complex conjugate of e
to the j 2pi ft is obtained just by taking
the exponent and flipping its sign.
Now what this suggests then is that can also have a negative frequency, right?
So I could have minus f.
And so what happens when I have a negative frequency?
Remember that when we had the positive frequency, f, what happens
is that the angle here is 2pi ft, and that's
just going to rotate in this counterclockwise direction
around the origin.
But if f is negative, all that happens is that this thing flips over
to the other side, and now when t increases,
it's actually going to rotate in the opposite direction, right?
So instead of rotating counterclockwise, it's
going to rotate clockwise around that origin.
So we can think about this kind of like a wheel, right?
If I have a wheel rotating around an axis, it can either rotate ,
clockwise which would correspond to a negative frequency,
or in the opposite direction, which would correspond to a positive
frequency.
And in some sense then, the speed that that wheel is rotating
is determined by the magnitude of f.
And the sign of f then determines the direction
of the rotation of that wheel.
Now, we've seen that the complex exponential
can be expressed as the sum of a cosine plus j times the sine.
We can actually take the complex exponential
and go back and get the cosine function. There’s two ways to do that.
One is, we can simply just say if I want the cosine function here,
and I have the complex exponential e to the j 2pi ft,
I can just drop down here and take its real part.
And so if we can imagine this, one way you can think about this
is, I can have a light shining down from the top here.
And as this dot here rotates around the origin, that
dot is going to cast a shadow, and as this dot rotates around here,
the shadow is going to be moving back and forth over here,
if the light is coming down like this.
And so that's just taking the real part.
But there's another way you can do that as well.
What we can do is think about adding e to the j 2pi ft,
with its complex conjugate, right?
So I'll show you the complex conjugate there.
And if I add this one to this one, I remember that's just
done by normal vector addition.
So if I do that, what you can see is that the imaginary part will cancel,
I go up and down by the same amount, and so I'll just move out all the way
to 2 times cosine 2pi ft.
And so if I just want to get cosine of 2pi ft, I just take that
and I divide by a half.
So there's two ways to take a complex exponential
and go and obtain a cosine function.
One of them is just by taking the real part,
and the other one is taking the complex exponential,
adding it to its complex conjugate, and dividing by 2.
There are other useful formulas for the complex exponential.
For example, in addition to the cosine, I can also get the sine.
A similar operation occurs, but instead of adding the complex conjugate,
I subtract the complex conjugate.
And then because that sine term, remember in Euler's identity
is imaginary, I have to cancel out that imaginary component
by dividing by 1 over 2j.
I can also look at a phase shift, right?
So if I take cosine of 2pi ft.
plus theta, if I just replace 2pi ft plus theta
into that expression over there, the exponential, and take the real part,
then what you can see is that, because if I multiply two exponentials
together, I'm just adding the exponents if I have the sum of two exponents that
corresponds to a multiplication.
And I can also express that as the sum of the complex exponential
inside that expression, plus its complex conjugate,
so I have to change the sign of both j 2pi ft and also j theta.
But again, I add those two things together and then divide by 2.
So I can get an arbitrary phase shift as well,
by considering a complex exponential and simply
just rotating it by an amount theta.