The discrete Fourier transform is very closely related to the discrete Fourier
series which we studied before.
So just as quick review, the discrete Fourier series
is a way of expressing any sample waveform, x of n,
which has capital N samples, as the sum of a bunch of cosine waves.
The frequencies of the cosine waves are all
fixed at f_k is equal to k divided by N,
where k runs from 1 to N divided by 2.
So for any sample waveform, those are all the same.
What differs from sample waveform to sample waveform
are the scaling coefficients, A_0 and A_k,
and the phase shift phi sub k.
Now, to understand the relationship between the Fourier series
and the Fourier transform, which expresses any sample
waveform as a sum of a bunch of complex exponentials,
let's start with what we know.
So we know the expression for the Fourier series, which
I saw in the previous slide, and I repeat here,
and I'm going to combine this with the fact
that I know that I can express the cosine as a sum of two
complex exponentials, right?
One complex exponential, e to the j 2 pi fk n times
e to the j phi sub k, where phi sub k is the phase
shift, plus its complex conjugate.
Where, to obtain the complex conjugate, what I do is I just take the exponents
and I just take the negative, or I flip the sign, right?
And I add those two things together and I divide by 2.
So I can express the cosine as the sum of the complex exponential
plus its complex conjugate divided by 2, and I'm simply
going to replace that into that expression
we see on the top over there.
And that gives me the discrete Fourier transform, right?
So when I do that replacement, all I do is I get the A_0, as I saw before,
and I'm going to get the sum here, but now I'm
going to get two sums, because I have the complex exponential here
plus its complex conjugate shown over there.
And I also get the factor of 1/2 in each of these sums over here.
And so, I can express this, then,  as the sum, now, from k is equal to,
minus N divided by 2, all the way up to N divided by 2,
where the sum from the negative indices of k
are obtained from that second summation over there, right?
So if I swap the sign of k from positive to negative,
then I can swap the signs inside there, and I
get an expression inside that sum that's exactly
the same as the one inside here, and so I get this much simplified sum.
And I can relate the coefficients now, of this sum
here, x of k, which are now complex, with the coefficients inside here
just by matching terms, right?
And so I know, for example, for k is equal to 0,
then, I'm just going to get x of 0 is equal to A_0, right?
And then for non-zero values of k, what I'm going to get
is, matching this one here with that term here,
you can see that, for positive values of k,
I'm just going to get this thing here.
And then for negative values of k, I'm going
to get the one that you can see on the other sum there.
And so then, in summary, then, the discrete Fourier transform,
instead of expressing any sample waveform with N samples
as a sum of cosine waveforms, what it does is,
it expresses it as a sum of complex exponentials, where,
now, the magnitude, A_0, or A_k, and the phase shift, phi sub k,
are combined into x of k, which is now a complex valued number.
So as an example of the relationship between the Fourier
transform and the Fourier series, let's take a look at the amplitude spectrum.
So remember that, if we have a waveform, for example, that looks like this one
here, we can always express it as the sum of a bunch of cosine components,
right?
This a particularly simple waveform here.
It consists of a constant term here of 1,
which is represented by this frequency component of 0, right?
Plus two additional cosine waves, one which oscillates up and down once,
right?
So that's at A1 here, and that has magnitude 0.8.
And then another one, a smaller one, with magnitude 0.4 that
oscillates up and down 10 times, right?
So that occurs at k is equal to 10.
So that was the discrete Fourier series amplitude spectrum
that we talked about before.
Now, we can also express this as a sum of complex exponentials,
where, if we're only interested in the amplitude, right, not in the phase,
we get that expression that we show over there, right?
And so, I plot that spectrum, the magnitude of x of k, over here.
And what we can see is that, just as we saw in the previous slide,
instead of only having positive values of k, as you can see over here,
we have both positive and negative values of k over here.
But there's a certain symmetry about the spectrum that you can see here.
You can see that this central element is preserved,
and it's preserved exactly the same.
So the magnitude of X_0 is exactly A_0.
Then what happens is, for every co-sinusoidal component
that we got over here, we get two complex exponentials, as we saw,
but now the magnitude is divided by 1/2.
Because remember, we had the cosine was equal to the complex
exponential plus it's complex conjugate, divided by 2.
So the magnitude of each of those complex exponentials is divided by 2.
And then you can see the other cosine represented by these two
complex exponentials over here.
So given the Fourier series spectrum, we can always go
to the Fourier transform spectrum.
And it turns out, we can also go vice-versa, the other way.