Masking is one of the key perceptual phenomena
that MP3 encoding uses in order to determine what kind of information
it can throw away without you noticing it.
So if you recall, the key steps in MP3 encoding are shown here.
We take our original input, we break it up into short time segments,
and for each time segment or frame, we do a frequency analysis.
And we pass the results of the frequency analysis
into the Psycho Acoustic Model.
And so this is where the effect of masking is taken into account.
So the Psycho Acoustic Model is a model of the way humans perceive sound.
So to understand what's included in the Psycho Acoustic Model,
we have to understand the idea of the auditory threshold.
So the auditory threshold looks at the perception of pure tones.
So if I just hear a single tone in the absence of anything else,
the question the auditory threshold answers is,
how loud does that sound have to be in order for you to hear it?
So the auditory threshold is plotted in yellow, shown over here.
And what you can see is that for different frequencies,
the auditory threshold is different.
So for frequencies over here, let's say around 1000,
it turns out that the sound which is plotted across this axis
here, where this corresponds to loud sounds and this corresponds to quiet
sounds. The sound doesn't have to be that loud before you can hear it,
before it crosses above the auditory threshold.
If the sound is below that point, you can't hear it.
On the other hand, if I look at low frequencies,
it turns out that we are much less sensitive to low frequencies.
In other words, that low frequency sound has
to be much louder before it crosses above the threshold in order for me
to hear it.
And so if I know this, then my MP3 encoder can say,
well, I've done a frequency analysis.
I know what the frequency content of the signal
is. I know how loud the signals are.
And in this case, if the sound is relatively quiet, maybe what I can do
is I can throw it away because even if I included it
in the reconstructed waveform at the output of the decompression stage,
you wouldn't be other hear it anyways.
Of course, throwing something away is a very severe kind of thing.
So we're not going to do that.
But the general idea is still about the same.
We're going to throw away something about those frequency components
that are, in this region here, relatively low frequency.
Now, masking is another phenomena that allows
us to further determine what kind of frequency information we need to keep.
And the idea of masking is that, for the original auditory threshold,
we are just looking at pure tones.
But now masking tells us about the interaction
between two different tones.
And so the idea of masking is suppose I have a more complex waveform,
but there's one tone inside there which is relatively dominant.
So for example, if I'm looking at music signals,
then you know the pitch of the musical instrument
is going to be a relatively dominant sound inside there.
And so what that dominant tone does is it masks nearby tones.
Right?
It makes nearby tones harder to hear.
And the way we can express that is by talking about the original pure tone
threshold, in yellow here, being raised up to this masking
threshold by the dominant tone.
So as the dominant tone becomes louder, what happens is it
pulls the threshold up as shown in this green line here.
And now what that means is that if I originally had a tone,
let's say that was at this location here,
that I could hear if it was by itself. If I
have this dominant tone next to it, the dominant tone raises the threshold up
to this point here.
So I can't hear this tone anymore.
So something that was originally perceptible
is now no longer perceptible because of the presence of that dominant tone.
And so if I know that that's not perceptible,
then perhaps I can throw away some information about the tones that
would be, let's say, inside this region over here.
While keeping, of course, the dominant tone
which would be the most important component.
Now, this might be surprising to you, and it's really
an effect due to some kind of nonlinear interaction between tones.
Let's try to take a look at that and see if we can actually
hear the effects of masking.
What I show you here is the spectrum of a sound
that has three frequency components.
It has one large frequency component here
at f_a, which is about 300 Hertz and two smaller frequency
components at f_b and f_c.
Now, suppose I wanted to try to compress this sound
by throwing away a frequency component.
Obviously I wouldn't want to throw away this big one over here,
because it's the most important one.
So I would have the choice of throwing away either of these two frequency
components over there.
What I want in the end is that, whichever one I throw away,
the sound that I get is going to be as close to this sound as possible.
So let's first take a listen to this one sound here.
And then we can think about well, would I
want to copy the sound, or approximate that sound by this sound here,
or this sound here?
In this sound here, I've said, well f_c here
has a smaller magnitude than f_b, 0.15 versus 0.2,
so that one's going to be less important.
So I'm going to throw that one away.
In this one down here what I've said is that, well, I
know because I have a masking threshold here.
It’s going to… The presence of this tone
here at f_a is going to make f_b a little bit less perceptible.
So maybe I can throw f_b away.
So let's listen to these two sounds and see which one of these
is closer to this one here.
In order to do that comparison what I'm going to do is I'm
going to first play Sound 1 followed by Sound 2.
Now, I'm going to play Sound 1 followed by Sound 3.
Let's take a listen to that again.
So I think, or hope, most of you agree this sound is perceptually more
similar to this sound over here.
And so that dramatically shows you the effect of masking,
that something that, from a pure magnitude perspective,
I might think this is more important.
But in fact f_c is more important.
So in summary then, the idea of masking is that if I have a loud dominant tone,
then frequencies near that dominant tone are less perceptible,
because the dominant tone raises the threshold
through… the threshold for hearing through a process called masking.
And so if I can do a frequency analysis and identify these dominant tones,
then I know that for frequencies around that dominant tone,
maybe I can throw away more information about those tones.