Time frequency analysis is one of the key ideas
behind the analysis of complex signals like music and speech,
and it's one of the key ideas underlying MP3 encoding.
So if you recall, these are the key steps of MP3 coding,
and time-frequency analysis really fits into this block
here where short time frequency analysis is one of the building
blocks of time frequency analysis.
So to understand this a little bit more, let's take a look
at the motivation for time frequency analysis.
And so the idea here is that complex sounds like music or speech,
over short time periods, they can be well described
by the sum of a few frequency components.
And so then, those kinds of short segments of speech and music
are very well suited for the kind of Fourier analysis
that we talked about before.
But in the long term, it turns out that that kind of description, the Fourier
analysis can be done, but it doesn't result
in only a few important frequency components.
And so what time frequency analysis does is
it tries to show how the short term frequency components change
over time as the sound changes.
And so one very intuitive way of doing time frequency analysis
is doing something which is called the spectrogram.
And the spectrogram starts out with a short term frequency analysis.
So to understand that, let's take a look at a sound waveform.
This waveform you can see here is a plot of the amplitude
of a waveform versus time.
As you can see, this waveform is varying quite quickly.
That's why it's quite solid.
But in any event, it doesn't look like a sine wave.
Now, if we look at short periods of that waveform,
it turns out that that does have a fairly sinusoidal characteristic.
And so in order to look at short periods of the waveform, what we first do is we
divide this waveform into frames.
And so those frames are about 20 to 50 milliseconds.
And then what we can do is we can look at just that part of the waveform
inside that particular frame.
And so in this case here, we have about 35, or let's say 40
frames in this waveform.
We can look at frame number 5.
And if we plot just the waveform inside there,
we see it has a highly sinusoidal appearance.
This is actually only the first 32 samples
of that frame, which we're showing you here.
But you can see it has a highly sinusoidal appearance.
And so if we do the kind of Fourier analysis
that we talked about before on the waveform inside that frame, what we'll
get is something that looks like this.
It has a single peak at a certain frequency
corresponding to the frequency at which this waveform is going up and down
and not that much else.
And so you can see that for this short waveform here,
short period of the waveform here, we can
get a nice representation that only depends on,
in this case, one frequency component.
We can also look at another frame.
Let's say we look at frame number 10 over there.
And we can see that it also has a kind of sinusoidal appearance.
But there are two things that are different about it.
Number one, if I look at the magnitude of this one versus the magnitude
of the one over there, you can see that the magnitude of the one on the right
is much smaller.
If I look at how quickly it's varying, you
can also see that the one on the right hand side is varying a little bit
slower than this one over here, suggesting
that its frequency should be lower.
And so if I do the Fourier analysis of the frame number 10, what I'll see
is that it looks different than the Fourier analysis of frame number 5.
What I can see is that the size of the peak is lower
and the position of the peak has shifted a little bit lower
toward lower frequencies because of the fact that it's changing slower.
And so what we can see then is that for short periods,
the waveform is well described by a few,
or in this case, a single sine wave. But the amplitude and the location
of that sine wave change over time.
What the spectrogram is, is it's a way of visualizing
the changes in the short term spectrum over time,
and that will actually tell us a lot about the kind waveform
that we're seeing.
This image shows you the spectrogram of the time waveform
that we just looked at on the previous slide.
The spectrogram is an image where horizontally, I'm showing you time,
or more specifically, what frame we're looking at.
And vertically, we're looking at frequency.
It's an image where the blue regions correspond to frequencies in time that
have low energy.
So in particular, if I look at a particular region of time
and I notice that it's blue across this whole vertical swath here.
I know that at that time, there's not much energy in any frequencies.
And so that would correspond to a period of silence.
On the other hand, if I look at a period of time
here where I notice that there might be a red region here,
then I know that there's a loud sound in that region.
So you can see already from this understanding
that we have in the waveform two parts, one
which is a sound here followed by silence
and then another sound over here.
We can also understand something about the sounds
by looking at a particular time and looking at its vertical cross section.
That corresponds to the short term spectrum that we talked about before.
So in particular, if we look at frame number 5 what we can see
is that if we look across frequency here,
we get that spectrum as shown over there where we get the large peak here
at around 2500.
If we then look at frame 10, what we can see
is that we get another peak now at a lower frequency, about 2000,
and it's also shorter.
In this case here, it would be a little bit less intense red.
We can also look at let's say this region over here around frame 30,
and we can see that it has a much more complex frequency spectrum.
It has a lot of components which are of relatively large magnitude.
And so from this, we can kind of try to guess what this sound might be.
It's going to be a pure tone that's going down in frequency
and getting quieter.
Then there'll be a silent period, and then there's
going to be some kind of complex sound that is fairly short.
And so let's take a listen to what that sounds like.
[AUDIO PLAYBACK]
[BEEPING]
So you could hear that decaying frequency, the silent period, and then
the sudden sound at the end, which is quite complex.
It might be an egg crashing on the floor.
So the spectrogram can be used to visualize
a wide range of different kinds of signals.
So it's particularly interesting to look at speech waveforms.
So here I show you two spectrograms corresponding to different words.
In this case here, we have the spectrogram of the word "she".
And so if we listen to that.
She.
What you can see is that it starts out with this "shhh", right.
Or the "shhh", that corresponds to this period over here.
And so a relatively long "shhh", and high frequency and quite spread out.
Then the person said "eee", and that's quite periodic.
And so what we can see is we have this kind of large frequency
components over here, and when the person said "eee",
you could hear a little bit that their pitch was going down,
and you can kind of see that with these downward curving lines over here.
So if I look at this spectrogram and I look at that spectrogram over there,
you can see that they're quite similar.
So that then suggests that the two words that are being said are similar.
Probably the latter part of the word, the second part of the word,
is the same. So it's probably something "eee", something like that.
But it's not "she" because it doesn't look the same here.
It's much shorter.
So it's a very short, something very short, followed by "eee".
So you might guess what that might be.
In fact, what it is is this.
T.
So T. "T" is the T sound.
It's a very short sound, so you can see that
at the beginning of that compared to this one over here,
much longer compared to the shorter T over there.
We can also look at other waveforms besides speech spectrograms.
So here, I show you two spectrograms.
One of these corresponds to a train whistle.
The other one corresponds to bird chirps.
And so you might look at this and you might have a guess already, right.
For example, the one on the right hand side looks a lot more regular.
So you might think that that would be a little bit more artificial,
and so that might be the train whistle.
But from this, we can already guess a little bit
about what the sound is going to be like.
You know that here, you're going to get 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, eight short sounds.
So if this really is the bird chirp, you're going to hear eight chirps.
And then with each short chirp, you're going to hear a decaying frequency.
So let's take a look at what that is.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
So you heard the different chirps over there.
The one over there, you can see probably only two sounds relatively extended
over time
and has a very strong periodic structure.
So it's going to be like kind of more like a musical note played constantly
for two bursts.
[AUDIO PLAYBACK]
[TRAIN WHISTLE]
[END PLAYBACK]
So what you can see from this is that the spectrogram gives you
a lot of different kinds of information.
And in fact, it turns out that if you have a more complex speech
sound, for example, something like this where the person is saying
Bayes' theorem. You can visualize the changes
in the sound using the spectrogram.
It turns out that for speech, if I have a word like Bayes' or theorem,
that can be broken down into different subunits called phonemes.
So the phonemes there would be things like "b", "ey", "z".
So those are individual sounds, and those kinds of phonemes are reused.
So for example, "b" in Bayes is the same as "b" in boy.
So those kind of phonemes are reused.
And it turns out that they have a very characteristic, the phonemes have
a varying characteristic spectral appearance.
So here, you can see this here, it corresponds
to "ey". This corresponds to "ih", the "th" and a "er," right. "ey z th ih er".
And so these things are all four different sounds,
and you can say they all have four vastly different spectral characteristics
that you can see within the speech waveform.
And so it turns out that this is actually the way
that we actually do speech recognition, by taking short periods of waveform,
looking at the spectral content and then trying to figure out what kind
of phonemes they correspond to.