Now that we understand the idea of the entropy of a single bit which
can assume one of two possible values, either 0 or 1.
We need to extend these ideas to more complex random variables.
In particular, discrete random variables, which
can assume one of K possible values.
And so we're going to indicate our notation here
as x_k being the possible values.
For example, 1, 2, 3 up to 10 or something like that
and the probabilities being p_k.
And so we can obtain our single bit that we talked about before (no period)
Just by setting K is equal to two (two possible values) or we
can handle more complex cases.
For example, choosing a number from 1 to 10, in which case K is equal to 10,
or throwing a die with 6 sides.
We can extend the idea of the entropy
to this more complex case in a fairly straightforward manner.
Remember that the information from a single outcome was -log_2(p).
And so if we take -log_2(p) and take the expected value of that,
we just multiply each of them by the probability,
and then add all of those together, and we get the entropy.
And so in particular, if you look at the case when K is equal to 2,
then 2 minus 1 is just 1.
I just have the sum over two terms, and we get the expression for the entropy
that we had previously.
Now, it's interesting to note here that the x_k
are the actual values of the random variables,
don't enter into this equation.
So it only depends on the probabilities or how likely it
is I am to choose one over the other, but whether I'm talking about,
say 1 to 10, or 11 to 20, that doesn't really make any difference.
Let's take a look at two example entropy calculations.
We'll start with the uniform distribution.
In this case, all outcomes are equally likely.
For example, if I ask you to choose a number from 1 to 10,
the probabilities would all be 1/10.
In this case, the entropy takes a relatively simple form.
If we simply substitute p_k is equal to 1 over K
into the expression for the entropy, we get
the expression shown on the right-hand side,
and what's happening there is that we're summing over, or averaging over,
a bunch of terms that are all the same.
They're all minus log to the base 2 of 1 over K,
and because log to the base 2 of 1 over K is just minus log to the base 2 of K,
the two minus signs cancel.
In particular, if we look at specific examples for different values of K,
we notice that when we set K equal to 2,
we're just back to the original example of the single bit
that we talked about earlier, and we know
in that case, the entropy when the 0 and 1 outcomes are equally likely
was 1 bit.
From our knowledge of binary numbers, we wouldn't
be surprised to see that if we have 4 possibilities,
we have 2 bits of information, 8 possibilities, 3 bits of information.
And so you can see that for 16, we'll have 4 bits.
For 32, we’ll have 5 bits, and so on.
However, the entropy calculation also allows
us to assign entropies to intermediate values between powers of 2.
For example, if I throw a six-sided die, then the amount
of average information contained in the outcome of that die is 2.6 bits.
We can also apply the entropy calculation in more complex cases
where the distribution is not uniform.
For example, let's go back to the idea that I
might have a preference for certain colors over the others.
So if you ask me to choose from one of these four colors.
Because I like the color blue, I'm more likely to choose it.
For example, 1/2 the time I'll choose it,
and the remaining time, I'll choose yellow 1/2 the time,
and then green only 1/8 of the time, and red 1/8 of the time overall.
Now, if I look at the formula for the information in each of those outcomes,
we see that for the blue outcome, the information, negative log to the base 2
of p_k is just 1 bit.
So there's not that much information I'm giving you
when I tell you I chose blue.
That's because you've already expected that, so it's not surprising to you.
There's no real new information there.
However, if we look at some of the more uncommon situations, for example,
green or red, you can see there's 3 bits of information assigned to those,
because those are very unlikely.
And so if we want to compute the entropy, what
we do is we calculate the expected value of all of those information values.
Take the weighted average. And when we do that calculation, we get 1.75.
Now remember, for the case where we had the four outcomes,
and they were all equally likely, then the entropy was 2 bits.
And so now what we see is there's a reduction in the entropy when I don't
have uniformly distributed outcomes.
This is because things are becoming, in some sense, more predictable,
so there's less information in me telling you what's happening there.
In fact, it turns out that the uniform distribution will always
have the largest entropy over any other possible distribution of probabilities
assigned to those different choices there.