Let's take a look at an example of the relationship between the input
and output of a band pass filter.
So recall we have different types of filters.
These differ depending upon the shape of their amplitude response.
We'll be looking at the band pass filter, the one shown in the middle
here.
The idea of a band pass filter is that it passes frequencies
within a certain band, and that band is determined by two frequencies,
f_l, the low frequency cutoff, all frequencies below
f_l are not passed by the filter and the high frequency cutoff f_h.
All frequencies above the high frequency cutoff are not passed either.
So to understand the relationship between the input and the output,
remember what we do is we take the original input,
and we can take the Fourier series representation.
And we're looking at here the amplitude spectrum,
and when the signal goes through the filter,
the cosine waves are scaled and shifted, and in the amplitude domain,
this corresponds to multiplying the amplitude spectrum by the frequency
response or the amplitude response of the filter shown here.
And so when we do that, what we get is we get this amplitude spectrum
down here, which is the amplitude spectrum of the output.
And then to recover the original output, what we do
is we sum those frequency components, and we get the signal down here.
Let's remember for all filters, this operation and this operation
are the same, and the only thing that differs
is the relationship between the input spectrum and the output spectrum.
So now we can see for this band pass filter,
it's passing this range of frequencies which
are the high frequencies in the signal so, in fact,
this filter is also similar to a high pass filter.
And so, consistent with that, we can see very, very quick oscillations
inside here, and we can see that the kind of low or slow transition
or the slow regions here plus 1 and minus 1 are not being passed.
What we can do is keep the relationship between the low frequency cutoff
and the high frequency cutoff the same, and move the region or the band
where this band pass filter is operating through and move it down.
So when we do that, now instead of passing these high frequencies here--
these three high frequencies-- we pass these three middle frequencies here.
And so now you can see two things.
Number one, you can see that the signal is varying much slower than we saw over
here, but we also see that these transitions
from low to high and high to low are not as reflected as well here.
So if we look at this one here, we have a low to high
and a high to low transition here, but if we
compare that with the previous signal, what we can see
there is that transition is much larger.
But the high frequency signal tends to drop down closer to 0
faster than this one over here.
We can then look at taking that band that the band pass filter is passing
and move it further down.
And when we do that, we can see that, again, the oscillations
become much slower, but we can also see that these transitions become slower
as well, if we compare this one, for example, with this one.
But at the same time, what's happening is
that we're getting more and more of these slowly varying
components, so you can see at this point here the signal was high close to 1,
and you can see after this transition, although it's slow,
it does stay up close to 1 longer than it did before.
And so if we compare then the band pass filter at these different frequency
bands, we can see the difference in how that's
reflected in the differences in the frequency contents of the signal.