One of the advantages of the Fourier series analysis
is that it allows us to interpret the operation of the communication channel
as a filter.
To get some motivation for this idea, let's look at an everyday filter
that we might use in our house.
For example, a water filter.
As we see schematically over here, the idea of a water filter
is to take some kind of water that might be dirty and hopefully at the output,
result in some water that is clean or maybe just pure water.
And so from an engineering point of view, what we say is,
we say that the input, the dirty water, might be consisting of different parts
or different components.
So for example, for the water example, these components
might be water plus maybe dirt particles of various sizes: small, medium
and large.
Hopefully at the output of the filter, what happens
is that all of the dirt particles are blocked or caught in the filter,
and the only thing coming out at the output would be pure water.
Of course, we can't always have a perfect example
of a water filter like this, and so what we know
is that very, very small particles might actually pass through.
And so we can characterize the operation of a filter,
perhaps, in terms of the percentages that we've shown over here.
For example, we might have a filter where 100% of the water
can get through, but it can't block the small particles.
So let's say 90% of the small particles get through,
but it does a pretty good job with the medium and large particles, only 10%
and 1% of the particles get through.
And so in this case here, we can kind of characterize
or understand the operation of this filter by looking at these percentages.
If we had a better water filter, maybe the percentage 90%
for the small particles would be smaller
and then we would have an idea of how well the filters are performing.
And so we can look at a communication channel in a very similar way.
What we can do is we can say look at different inputs that
go into the channel, and look at the outputs, and we can say,
well, it seems like some parts of the signal are passing through the channel
and other parts are not, so some parts are being blocked.
In particular, the very, very flat regions here, you can see,
are replicated very well on the other side,
but you can see that these very quick transitions that we saw over here
on the input side are not replicated very well on the other side.
And so can we look at this idea and say, well,
the channel is somehow operating as a filter.
It's kind of passing some things through or letting some things pass through
or blocking other things.
And so then we can kind of understand this by answering two questions.
One, what are the components of the input signal?
What are the things that are added together
to create this input signal? And then secondly,
how do we describe how much of these components
are passed from input to output?
So kind of like the percentages that we saw on the previous page.
And we've already seen some way of decomposing
the signal into different components.
For example, we've seen the idea that we can express a signal
as the sum of a bunch of input steps.
For example, if we see the waveform over here,
we can take scaled and delayed unit steps and, for example,
here, if we assume that the input was 0 beforehand,
then we might have a step up to 3 at time 0 and then a step from 3 to 5
or a change in 2 at time 2 and then back down by 2 at time 11 and so on.
And so this is one way that we can describe
the relationship between the input and some components
that are added together to create the input.
But one problem with using this signal decomposition in order
to describe the operation of the filter is
that if we look at the communication channel, if we put in a unit step
into the communication channel, what comes out is not a unit step.
So the components that we use to describe the input here
are not the same as the things that are coming out at the output.
And that becomes a problem.
So what we'd like to be able to do then is
find a way of describing any signal in terms of a sum of components, where
any signal can be expressed as a sum of those components and, in addition,
if I put in that signal (component) alone at the input to the channel, what comes out
is something that looks pretty much the same, which
is not true for the unit step.
The kind of decomposition technique that we can use in this case
is the Fourier series, so if we recall, the Fourier series
is an expansion which allows us to express any input waveform
x of n in terms of the sum of a bunch of cosines at different frequencies.
And these cosines might be scaled in amplitude and shifted in phase,
but they all are different what we call frequency components.
And it turns out that this is the kind of decomposition
that we can use in order to understand the operation of a channel as a filter.