The frequency response is a way of characterizing
the operation of a communication channel,
or in fact any linear time invariant system
where we're kind of characterizing the operation of that channel as a filter,
as we discussed earlier.
So let's take a look at what the frequency response describes.
Remember that what we want to do is, we wanted
to describe the input of the channel as a sum
of a bunch of different components, in this case when
we talk about the Fourier series, those components
are cosinusoidal waves with different amplitudes, frequencies,
and phase shifts.
And it turns out that for a linear time invariant system,
that if I put in a cosine wave at the input
to a linear time invariant system, what comes out of the system
is another cosine wave.
So the components look the same, they look the same in the sense
that it's another cosine wave and it has exactly the same frequency.
But what is different about the input and the output,
is that that cosine when it comes out might be scaled in amplitude,
and so we call that scaling factor S of f.
And then we also have a shift in phase, and so that's going
to be given by this term theta of f.
And so, one of the interesting things about the operation of a linear time
invariant system is that the scaling factor and the phase shift
are frequency dependent.
All right, so input cosine waves with different frequencies
will come out at the output with different scaling
factors and with different delays or phase shifts.
And so this function, S of f, which describes how different frequencies are
passed through the channel and scaled, is
known as the magnitude or the amplitude response to the filter.
And the theta of f is known as the phase response to the filter.
And together these two things are known as the frequency response.
Now, we can use the frequency response to predict
the output of a filter for any given input.
And we can do this in a way very reminiscent of the way
we handled the prediction of the input to the output,
using the unit step functions.
We exploit the linearity and time invariant of the channel.
And so this is going to follow a very similar three-step
process that we studied earlier.
In step one, what we're going to do is we're
going to take the input waveform x of n, and convert from the time domain
to a frequency based representation, by using the Fourier series.
So we're going to express x of n as a sum of a bunch of cosine waves.
Now we know that we can always do that for any signal,
and so this is a very generic or general formulation.
Now we know that if we look at each one of these input cosine waves
individually, and we pass that through this channel or linear time invariant
system, that we know that what's going to happen
is that this cosine wave is going to come out at the output.
The only difference is it's going to be scaled in amplitude by S of f,
and shifted in phase by theta of f.
And so if we look at each of the components individually,
we can predict what happens to each of those components individually.
But it turns out that due to the linearity and time
invariant of the channel, in particular the linearity, what we can do
is predict the output to this combined set of inputs,
just by adding the outputs to each of the inputs applied to the channel
individually.
That's exactly what we did when we were analyzing the problem with the unit
step.
And so, the amplitude response then describes the channel,
because what the amplitude response does is
it tells us for different frequencies what happens to those components
as they go through the channel.
If the amplitude response S of f is large,
right, then it means that those components go through,
and they are relatively unchanged as they go through,
or perhaps they're even magnified.
And if S of f is small, it means those are blocked.
So this S of f is kind of describing what
happens to the different components, where the components are separated
by different frequencies, or distinguished by different frequencies.
Much in the same way when we were looking at the water filter,
we separated the input into different components by size, and we said well,
according to the size of the input, the components
are blocked in different amounts.
In this case for the linear time invariant channel,
instead of separating things by size, we separate things by frequency or quickly
varying and slowly varying components.