Let's take what we've learned and apply that to the infrared channel or IR
channel that we've been using in the labs in this course.
If we recall, the IR channel tends to respond relatively slowly,
so the slowly varying, or the flat regions of the signal
tend to pass through.
And then the sharp transitions, or high frequencies do not.
And from our analysis before, what we would expect,
then, is that the IR channel should have a low pass characteristic.
Now, you might be asking, well, we've already studied the IR channel,
and we already know what its step response is, so how is the frequency
response different?
And the answer is that, the step response and the frequency response
are really equivalent.
Both of them provide enough information to compute
the output of the channel in response to any input.
And therefore, if I know the step response,
I should be able to figure out the frequency response.
And if I know the frequency response, I should be
able to figure out the step response.
And in fact, that's true.
So what's the difference?
The difference is, really, it's a different way of understanding
the operation of the channel.
They're really just different ways of looking
at the same kind of information.
So the step response tells us how the output
is changing over time in response to a very stereotypical input, the step
input.
And so, this was very useful, for example,
when we are looking at the eye diagram, or looking at the response of the waveform
to bits.
The frequency response, on the other hand,
gives us a different kind of perspective on the channel.
It says, rather than looking at it as a bunch of unit steps,
let's look at it as the composition of many, many different co-sinusoids
at different frequencies.
And this is a better way to understand the signal, especially
the operation of the channel, especially if we
want to understand the effect of the channel in response
to more complex signals than these kinds of very square bitstreams
that we've talked about before.
And so, because of the fact that the step response and the frequency
response are equivalent, we should be able to look at a step response
and at least see or predict something about what the frequency response might
look like.
And what I show you in this slide here is
that we have four different step responses for four different channels,
and you can see that these four different channels have different step responses.
On the other side, we see amplitude responses
in the frequency domain for the same channels, but they're not matched.
In other words, this one at the top doesn't
correspond to that one at the top.
And so the question then is, which of these step responses
corresponds to which of those frequency responses over here?
So in order to figure out this, we can look
at the properties of the step response and how they change, and look
at the properties of the frequency response and how they change,
and try to do that matching.
So if we look from top to bottom here, what we see
is that the step responses become slower and slower.
So this one is very fast and this one is very slow.
So we can look at the two extreme cases and try to do that matching first.
And so in this case here, let's look at the fastest step response here.
Which of those frequency responses would correspond to the channel that
has this very, very fast step response?
And so in order to think about that, we think about,
well, if we have a fast step response, what
does that mean about the kind of components
that we would expect to pass through?
And in this case here, if it responds very quickly,
then it should be the output of the channel
should be able to change very quickly.
And so, therefore, we would expect very fast changes
to be able to pass through.
Remember, in the frequency domain, those kinds
of fast responses correspond to very, very high frequencies.
And if those high frequencies are going to pass through, what it means
is that, for those high frequencies, the amplitude response of the filter
should be relatively large.
So now, if we look across those four responses on the other side,
we can look and, say, let's look at the frequency at 0.2, which
is relatively high, which of those responses has the largest value?
And we see that it's the third one, so it turns out
that this one here corresponds to the third amplitude
response shown over there.
What about this one down here?
This one responds very, very slowly.
So if one responds very, very slowly, then what we would expect is that,
only very slowly varying or low frequency signals can pass through.
So the amplitude response should be large for low frequencies,
but should drop down very quickly as the frequency increases.
And so, if we look on the other side and we say,
which of those amplitude responses starts out high and then drops down
very quickly, we see that it's the first one.
And so, the bottom one here corresponds to the first amplitude
response over there.
And if we look at these two channels here in the middle, what we see
is that this one here is going to be faster than this one.
And so, therefore, the frequency response
or the amplitude response of this one should drop down slower than this one
here.
So if we look at the remaining two, which one decays slower, drops down slower,
as the frequency increases?
We see that, for this one, it corresponds
to the second one over there.
And for, then, finally, by elimination, the third one
here corresponds to the fourth amplitude response over there.
And what we see here is that the IR channel does not
have that kind of ideal response, or cutoff
that we saw in the previous lecture.
It kind of drops off more gradually.
But the general shape of the amplitude response
can be used to infer properties of the channel
that we know from the step response, but it's
a kind of different in a way of looking at the operation of the IR channel.