Let's take a look at the relationship between the input
and the output of a high pass filter.
So as we recall, we have different types of filters
that differ depending upon their amplitude response.
And we'll be looking at the high pass filter whose amplitude
response is shown on the bottom there.
And the idea of a high pass filter is that it's
going to pass all frequencies above a certain cutoff frequency f_co
and block everything below that.
And in the audio domain, this would correspond
to emphasizing the treble components of the music.
So remember that when we look at the relationship between the input
and the output of the filter, in order to predict that,
we go through several steps.
We take the Fourier series first to find the amplitude spectrum
of the original signal.
Then we multiply that amplitude spectrum by the frequency response
of the filter, that corresponds to scaling and shifting those cosines.
And then we obtain the resulting amplitude spectrum,
which is the amplitude spectrum of the output,
and then we can then reconstruct the output
by summing those components together.
And remember that this part and this part is the same for all filters.
So the only difference is the relationship
between this point and this point here, which
is affected by the shape of the frequency response
that we can see over here.
And so for this one here, the high pass filter
is blocking all of these low frequency components up to k is equal to 48,
and so that's because the amplitude response is 0.
And so the only thing that passes is the frequency components
where the amplitude response is 1, and those are shown over there.
So we only have these two very, very high frequency components
that are in the resulting output.
And so you can see that the output is here oscillating very quickly
corresponding to those two frequency components around 52
and 60 oscillations over the entire waveform of 256 samples.
And what we can see is that these kinds of very slowly varying
components, these long and flat parts at minus 1 and plus 1
have completely disappeared.
So now the signal is just sitting here oscillating purely around 0,
but we can see these transitions from low to high and high to low
in the output.
So you can see there is a transition from low to high and high to low.
So those are preserved.
So the slowly varying components are removed by the high pass filter,
but the quickly varying components are passed through.
And then we can look at what happens when we take that cut off frequency
and lower it down.
And when we lower it down, what happens is
that we start to add in more of these lower frequencies
that start passing through the filter.
And we can see that the output changes.
And if we compare the output here with the previous filter’s output,
with the higher cutoff frequency, we can see that the changes are much slower.
And we can see that actually these kind of slower varying components, here
the flat part here, and the flat part here, are starting to pass through.
You can see here in the original one, it just made this quick transition
and then went back, right back down to 0 almost right away.
But now you can see after the quick transition,
it stays high for a longer time before settling back down around 0.
We can further lower the cutoff frequency.
And when we do that, all the way down to here, what we have is
the output contains all the frequency components of the original input,
except for this single low frequency component down here at around 4.
And so that means that this single frequency component is going
to oscillate up and down four times.
And we can see that actually that component is missing here.
So you can imagine that if we took a cosinusoidal signal
signal of the right phase and added it to this one here.
So if we had an oscillation like this and added on to that,
that cosinusoidal oscillation would cancel out this portion over here
and flatten out the signal so we would get the original signal.
In other words, by it removing this low frequency component
by the high pass filter, we've got this transition back toward 0.
Although, we still have these rapid transitions as we can see here.