Let's take the example of a low pass filter.
As we recall, there are different types of filters
that differ depending upon their amplitude or their frequency response.
And so we'll look at the low pass filter here, which
has a frequency response that looks like the one that you see on the top there.
And so the idea of the low pass filter is
that it tends to pass components of the signal that have low frequencies,
below a certain cutoff frequency FCO, and then it
tends to block the higher frequencies.
And so if we were talking about an audio application, this kind of filter
would block high frequencies
or emphasize the lower frequencies of the base of the signal.
And so if we take a look at the operation of the filter,
remember what we do.
We first take the input signal, then we find its frequency spectrum,
and then we multiply the frequency spectrum
by the scaling of the amplitude response.
And that gives us the frequency spectrum of the output, which we can then
convert back into our time wave form.
OK?
And so if we look at this, what happens is that this for all filters
is fixed, right?
This is just taking the Fourier series.
This is also fixed.
This is just the inverse of the Fourier series
or reconstructing the signal by adding those sine waves together.
So the only thing that really differs for different filters
is this step inside here, which is the amplitude response.
And you can see here what we're doing is we're
going to pass all frequencies here, multiply all these components by 1,
so they pass through the filter unchanged,
and block all the frequency components, let's say, past about 48.
And so you can see those two frequency components down
there are blocked so they're missing, and because we've
subtracted relatively high frequency sine waves from the signal, what
you see is that there is a high frequency oscillation now
in the signal, and if we counted this,
we will see there would be about, let's say,
52 peaks inside this oscillation here.
Now, we can also see that the transitions here from low to high
have also been somewhat blurred, right?
You can see the transition here is quite fast, but here quite slow.
And we can say, well, what happens to the signal or the output signal
when we keep the same input but we change the cutoff frequency.
And so when we lower the cutoff frequency, what
we'll see is that we'll start to cut off more of these signals,
so if we look here, these components here were present in the input.
There's nothing changed here from the previous example,
but what's changed is because of the cutoff frequency here,
we're now blocking more high frequency signals.
And so now, what you can see here is that the oscillations are much slower,
you can see because it has mainly low frequency components or things that
vary slowly, and you can also see that, compared
to the previous example, if you go back here and just look
at the change in the response to the low-to-high transition
and the high-to-low transition, you can see that the slope is much lower.
So we're blocking more and more of those quick changes.
And finally, if we lower the cutoff frequency one more time so
that we in the end pass only one component, only one frequency
component, then what you can see is that the output
waveform just looks like a sine wave, as you can see here.
So then let's just take a quick look at what
happens when we change the frequency response from going from high to low,
you can see that the signal gets slower and slower,
and we see only the low frequencies in the end.