Hello everyone.
Welcome to the lab demo for Lab 3.
Consider the communications system here
which includes three key components.
The transmitter, the receiver, and the channel.
In Lab 2,
We have introduced the time frequency analysis for my voice signals.
Here is one example of the frequency analysis for my voice signal.
From the frequency domain representation of the voice,
we can identify the frequency components of my voice.
Recall from Part 1 of this course, the key
for designing a communication system is to develop some communication
techniques to handle the bad effects of the channel.
Now, since we have been able to look at signals in the frequency domain,
can we do the same thing for the channel? Or in other words,
can we characterize the channel in the frequency domain?
If the answer is yes, then what kind of information we are looking for?
Obviously, we are not looking for the frequency components of the channel,
because channel is not a signal.
In fact, the kind of question we want to answer
is, how will the channel affect different frequency
components of the signal?
Before jumping into the frequency domain representation of the channel,
let's first review how we characterize the channel in the time domain.
Recall from Part 1 of this course, we have used step response
to characterize the channel in time domain.
In order to obtain the step response, we send a step function to the channel,
and we observe the output from the channel.
At that time, we have identified four channel effects,
including offset signal, which comes from the ambient light, time
offset, which corresponds to the propagation delay, the range, k,
which represents the channel gain. And finally
the exponential response, which is the major reason
for intersymbol interference.
At that time, we proposed this mathematical model
to model the step response.
And we have used this model to develop equalizer, which can help
to remove intersymbol interference.
The next question is, can we tell the frequency response
from the time response of a channel?
Let's consider this extreme case.
Imagine we have a perfect channel, if you sent a step function
to this perfect channel, it will react.
It will you give you a response, the step function.
Then, can we tell the frequency response of the channel
from the output of the channel, which is also a step function?
Recall that any signal, including the step function,
can be regarded as a weighted sum of frequency components.
Now at the receiver side, we have exactly the same waveform.
That means the frequency components of this transmitted signal,
which is the step function, will experience the same response
for different frequencies.
We call it the flat channel in frequency domain.
Then, how can we estimate the frequency response of the IR channel
in our experiment?
Obviously the IR channel is not perfect, because the output
is no longer the step function.
Then, how can we estimate the frequency response of the IR channel?
Recall that in order to obtain the frequency response,
we need to get the response of the channel
to different frequencies of the transmitted signal.
So what we can do is, we can transmit several single tone
sinusoid signals at different frequencies to the channel,
and look at their corresponding responses.
By comparing the received signal and the transmitted signal,
we can estimate the frequency response of the channel.
Now, let's look at one MATLAB Program to see how we can estimate the channel.
In this program, we will see how we can estimate the frequency
response of the channel by sending single tone sinusoid signals
with frequencies at 1k 10k and 50k Hertz respectively.
For each frequency, we will first create thesinusoid source
signal, which is a sine function, with frequency f and amplitude 1.
Then, we will transmit the signal from our transmitter.
The signals reflected by the board will be collected by our receiver.
Recall that the IR channel will affect a single tone sinusoid
signal in two aspects.
Namely, the scaled amplitude and the shifted phase.
Here, we use the peak-to-peak value of the received signal
to measure the scaled amplitude.
Next, we will show both the transmit and the received signals
in the same figure.
If I create a break point here, and run the program,
we can have the result for the frequency 1k hertz.
The upper plot corresponds to the transmitted signal,
and the lower plot corresponds to the received signal.
We can observe that the transmitted signal has an amplitude 1.
High were the received signal has an amplitude, which is much smaller
compared to the transmitted signal.
In fact, the peak-to-peak value is 0.1494.
If we click Continue, we will have the result
for the case of with frequency 10k hertz.
Obviously, the peak-to-peak value of the received signal
is further reduced to 0.1134.
Similarly, if we run the program, the result
for the case with frequency 50 hertz will be somehow similar.
Basically, the peak-to-peak value of the received signal
is further reduced to 0.0339.
This tells us the IR channel will give a lower response for a higher
frequency signal.
So essentially, the IR channel here works like a low pass filter.
In a previous example, we have estimated the frequency response of the channel,
by sending three single tone signals at frequency 1k, 10k, and 50k hertz.
We observed their corresponding responses at the receiver side,
and basically the channel will give a lower response for a higher frequency.
And essentially, it works as a low pass filter.
Recall that the only purpose to understand the channel
is to design some communication techniques, which
can help to handle the bad effects of the channel.
For example, in Part 1 of this course, we
have modeled the response of the channel, by the step response.
And we have used the model to develop equalizer,
which can help to remove intersymbol interference,
and recover the waveform from its distorted version.
Then the next question is, can we understand the process of equalization
also in the frequency domain?
The answer is yes.
So we know the IR channel is not perfect.
It will give different responses for different frequency components.
That is the reason why we have the exponential response,
and also the reason why we have intersymbol interference.
However, after going through the equalizer,
we know that all frequency components of the signal will experience the same,
or we can call it the equal response.
That is also why we call this technique equalization.
Now, let's look at one MATLAB Program to see how equalization happens
in both time and frequency domain.
In this program, we will see how equalizer works.
The program here is almost the same as the previous one.
The only difference is, we ask the received signal
to go through the equalizer we developed in Part 1 of this course.
After that, we will show the received signal before and after
equalization in the same figure.
If I create a break point here, and run the program,
we will see the result for the case with frequency 1k hertz.
So basically, we can see that the received signal
before and after equalization have almost the same waveform.
Basically, the peak-to-peak value of the
received signal will be slightly increased from 0.1494 to 0.15.
However, if we click Continue, the results
for the case at frequency 10k hertz will be a little bit different.
Basically, the peak-to-peak value of the received signal
will be increased from 0.1134 to 0.15.
If we click Continue again, we will have the result
for the case at frequency 50k hertz.
For this case, the peak-to-peak value will be significantly increased
from 0.0339 to 0.15.
If we look at the results here, we can see
that the IR channel will give different responses for different frequency
components, namely 0.1494 for 1k hertz, 0.1134 for 10k hertz,
0.0339 for 50k hertz.
That means the IR channel will gave a lower response for higher frequency
signals.
However, after going through the equalizer,
all frequency components will experience the same response,
that is 0.15, 0.15, 0.15.
Basically, this tells us equalizer can guarantee
that all frequency components of the transmitted signal
will experience the same, or we can call it equal response.
That's also why we call it equalizer.
So in the previous example, we have observed
that the IR channel will give different responses to different frequency
components of the transmitted signal.
Basically, the higher the frequency, the lower the response.
However, after going through the equalizer,
all frequency components will experience the same response.
That's also why we call it the equalization process.